Enterprise Asset Management (EAMS) v15
Notifications
End User Documentation
Update 3/1/2024

EAMS v15 End User Documentation:
Notifications
Notifications
MaintStar can send email or text messages to internal and external users under a variety of
circumstances. For Work Order, this includes:
• When a WO is created
• When a WO is saved with a new value in "Assigned To", or "Work in Progress"
• When a WO is closed
• When a part is received
• When a task is complete
• When a particular asset is added to a WO
There are also notifications for Work Requests. More information can be found in the Work Request
Chapter.
Notification Types
Notifications can be sent in three different ways: Internal Notifications, Email, and Text (SMS).
Internal notifications are accessed in Home -> Notifications. This is a simple solution if you prefer to
check your messages in the MaintStar application, or keep a record of them.
Email notifications require that the user has a valid email address on record. The user can access their
own email in Home -> My Preferences, or an administrator can access it via Security -> Users.
Text (SMS) notifications require that the user has a valid Cell Phone on record. The user can access their
own cell number in Home -> My Preferences, or an administrator can access it via Security -> Users.
Note that a country code is needed for texting to work (1 for USA). This can be accomplished in two
ways:
• The user manually includes their country code in their phone number (ex: 1-555-555-5555)
Page | 2

EAMS v15 End User Documentation:
Notifications
• The administrator can have the system automatically prepend a Phone Country Code. This can
be configured in Security -> System Settings.
User Preferences
User notification preferences determine which notifications will be received:
• Notify by Text
• Show Notifications in Notifications list (aka Internal Notifications)
• Notify by Regular Email
These options can be accessed by the user themselves in Home -> My Preferences, or by an
administrator in Security -> Users. A user can receive any combination of internal notifications, email, or
texts depending on these settings.
If the administrator prefers the user to not have control over notification preferences, they can
check May Edit Notifications Setup in Security -> Users.
Work Order Notification Setup
Configuring system wide Work Order Notifications is a system administrator task. To configure
notifications for work orders, you will find two tabs in Security -> Workgroups: Notification by User and
Notification by Role.
Page | 3

EAMS v15 End User Documentation:
Notifications
• Notification by Role: when configured, staff will only receive notifications for things directly
relevant to them. You will see a grid of checkboxes, which will determine who receives
notifications and under which circumstances. For example, you can set it up so that only
"Assigned To" receives a message when "Assigned To" is changed, but "Supervisor" will receive a
message when the WO is created or when the WO is closed.
• Notification by User: Allows specific staff to be notified when specific things happen. For
instance, when a Work Order is closed or changed and you only want one user to be notified,
use this method.
NOTE: You can not further define actions, ie “I want this, but not that”.
Page | 4

EAMS v15 End User Documentation:
Notifications
Both tabs also have dropdowns where you can choose Templates. Templates determine what the
message says when it's generated. MaintStar comes with default templates, but you can also create
your own.
WR Notification Setup
Notifications for Work requests work slightly differently. When a WO is created from a WR, this will
trigger the same way as any other WO notification. But for other WR-specific events, notifications can be
configured in Work Request -> WR Settings. Two tabs are relevant here: Notif. Templates and
Operations.
Operations is the tab for setting up Operations and Issues to categorize work requests (see
documentation on WR Issues and Operations). On this screen, you can assign an internal user (i.e. not a
member of the public) for notifications on a specific Issue or Operation. To do this, simply edit an issue
or operation and add or remove users to that row as needed.
What are these users being notified for exactly? This is where the Notif. Templates tab becomes
relevant. On the Notif. Templates tab, the Notifications for Internal Users section determines which
notifications those users receive and when they receive them:
• Notify when Operation selected will trigger when an internal user is assigned to a particular
Operation and a WR is created for that Operation.
• Notify when Issue selected will trigger when an internal user is assigned to a particular Issue
and a WR is created for that Issue.
• Notify when WR is assigned is sent to the assigned user when a WR is created with an assignee
or is edited to have an assignee.
• Notify supervisor when WR is assigned is sent to the user in the Supervisor field when a WR is
created with an assignee or is edited to have an assignee.
• Notify when WR is closed is sent to Operation users when a work request is closed.
• Notifications to Requester by Group - These notification options can be customized based on
individual groups. Configure one group in particular by selecting it on the dropdown. Notifying a
requester means notifying the user in the Customer ID field.
All of these options have a corresponding Template dropdown for choosing a notification template (see
Templates section). The notifications will not function unless a template exists for that notification.
Notification Templates
Templates determine what a message will say when it's sent. While MaintStar comes with default
templates, you can also create your own to better suit your needs. You can view, edit, and create
templates in Security -> Notification Templates.
To create a new Template, click "Add" on top of the list of existing templates. Take careful note of the
Template Type - this will determine where in the system you will be able to choose the template.
Templates can contain special variables, which will be replaced based on the specific work order or work
request. For example:
Page | 5

EAMS v15 End User Documentation:
Notifications
Work order $WONO has been assigned to $ASSIGNTO
might become: Work order W000000001 has been assigned to JohnDoe
A full list of available fields can be found on the right-hand side, along with descriptions. These fields are
different depending on the Template Type. These fields will work in both the Subject line and the Body
lines.
You will notice there are two text boxes for the body of the message: Email Text and SMS and MaintStar.
Both can be filled out.
Page | 6

