Enterprise Asset Management (EAMS) v15
Work Planning Module
End User Documentation
Update 12/30/2024

EAMS v15 End User Documentation:
Work Planning Module
Work Planning Module Overview
The Work Planning Module is an optional and licensed business management method of identifying and
evaluating activities that an organization performs, using activity-based costing to carry out a value
analysis to improve strategic and operational decisions in an organization. It is also known as Activity
Based Management. By evaluating planned versus actual work, organizations can optimize the planning
and allocation of resources.
While a work order shows the work completed, work planning shows what needs to be accomplished
with the resources available. Work Planning builds on what the work order captures from a higher
perspective. The work plan seeks to analyze key activities that the organization performs and not just
capture costs of their execution, but to establish goals for future accomplishment. These future goals for
activities and established for accomplishment value and for expected cost, based on available resources.
The Plan can then be compared to actual accomplishment and cost to determine if the organization is
on track to meet the established goals, or if resources should be adjusted to gain efficiency.
Due to the complexity of initial setup and ongoing maintenance, it is strongly recommended that
MaintStar provide training and system implementation assistance for this module.
Planning and Budgeting for Municipalities Overview
MaintStar’ s Work Planning System is specifically designed for municipalities to track varieties of daily
activities, such as roads, sewers, traffic signs and other infrastructures repairs/replacements. This
module is designed as a financial tool and is activities driven. It provides a great degree of detail for
budgeting purposes, and in addition to planning capabilities, tracks actual amount of work performed
against what was planned or budgeted.
The infrastructure planning capabilities includes specific equipment requirements, (trucks, bulldozers,
sweepers, etc.) materials needed (concrete, paint, etc.) as well as crew size planning. It also tracks crew
productivity and provides automatic cost roll up to specific city department, subdivision, multi-level cost
center, area etc.
The planning capabilities provide a great degree of built-in flexibility and can be implemented on
weekly, monthly, quarterly, or annual basis. It includes financial and budgeting components and should
not be confused with a simple work order as it does more – it processes estimated work against actual.
Definitions
To project a budget for labor, materials and supporting equipment requirements, the following
information needs to be entered and maintained in MaintStar:
• Management Unit: often a Department, Division, Project or specific cost center
• Activities: actual work or description of work to be accomplished, often tied to a unit of
measurement, i.e. “HVAC Installation” with a measurement of “Each”
• Work Quantity: the total volume of work per specific type of jobs, which is called Activity. For
example, in case of estimating road-paving activities, total miles of roads need to be paved
• Quantity per unit: unit of measure = 1 mile
Page | 2

EAMS v15 End User Documentation:
Work Planning Module
• Average Daily Productivity (ADP) –how many units produced per day by crew. Example: 10
miles/day per crew
• Crew: group of people performing specific tasks
• Total crew days required: total work quantity/crew daily productivity
• Unit Cost: budget/total work quantity (including labor and materials)
• Account Number: Specific cost center-from MaintStar setup tables
Work Planning Example
In this example, there is a monthly plan to pave 100 miles of roads. The job to be performed by a
maintenance crew consisting of:
• One supervisor
• Two paving specialists
• Two truck drivers
• Two maintenance workers
• 1 Dump track = 3 hours a day
• 1 Paving vehicle = 8 hours a day
Budgeting period: The ‘time’ for which budget is setup and tracked (week, month, quarter, year)
Percentage of activities distribution: percentage of total labor, equipment required, and materials
distribution per each activity for each Management Unit for specific budgeting period. For example, if
there is a budget for 12 monthly periods, streets paving may represent 8% of total daily activities for an
entire maintenance department. The maintenance department may perform other activities, such as
streets sweeping, trimming trees, repairing road drains, etc.
• % default come from an activity code setup
Each activity must have a specific unique I/D or code, for example
• Streets paving code: 0001
• Streets sweeping code: 0002, etc.
Labor days = total crew days x crew size / % per month. If there is a plan on a weekly basis, and a crew
works 5 days a week, the total crew labor days =5x { (2people x1 1=full day for 2paving specialists+1x1(1
paving vehicle driver) +2x1( 2 helpers) + 1X 0.25-dump truck driver which works only part time-one
quarter of a day on this activities }=5.25 man days X 5 days per week=26,25 crew total man days per
week required to accomplish streets paving.
Work Planning Menus
The Work Planning Module is accessed from the Work Planning menu item in the sidebar, and contains
the following (all of which will be covered throughout this document):
Page | 3

EAMS v15 End User Documentation:
Work Planning Module
• Work Planning Setup: Contains the various setup and
maintenance screens
• Actual Entry: Allows for direct entry of time NOT associated
with Work Orders, i.e. meetings, training, time off, etc
• Work Plan Reports: Collection of pre-built reports specific to
Work Planning. Reports can also be supplemented via Query and
Reports
• Tools: contains calendar and plan rollover tools
Work Planning Setup Menu Overview
The Work Planning setup section has several tabs across the top of the screen. These tabs were
separate menu items in earlier versions of MaintStar.
*The letter identifier is a reference from the previous version of MaintStar that many customers grew
accustomed to and does not indicate any sort of precedence in setup.
• (A) Work Plan: The primary screen for setting up the actual plans – this is used after setups
have been completed.
• (L) Activity: Screen for creating and updating activities. This can also be accomplished via Setup
Tables in Setup > Tables.
• (K) Management Unit: Screen for creating and updating Management Units
• (M) Percentage Templates: Setup for allocation of resources by percentage or days.
• (S) Calendar: Screen for setup of Fiscal (or Calendar) Years
• (N) Activity Programs: A collection of Activities (i.e. Roads Activity Program may contain all
activities pertaining to Roads)
• (O) Labor Trades: Setup of Trades. This can also be accomplished via Setup Tables in Setup >
Tables.
Page | 4

EAMS v15 End User Documentation:
Work Planning Module
• (Q) Equipment Types: Allows for classification of equipment, for instance “Trucks”, “Heavy
Equipment”, etc.
• (P) Material Classes: Allows for classification of materials, for instance “Paint”, “HVAC”, etc.
• (R) Pay Types: Setup of Pay Types. This can also be accomplished via Setup Tables in Setup >
Tables.
• (X) Funding Sources: Allows for additional funding sources to be added
Work Planning Setup
The following is a suggestion for the initial setup of Work Planning. For the purposes of this
documentation, there may be a slight variation in screens shown.
Calendar Setup
Start by setting up the fiscal year in the Calendar tab. This setup choice allows you to establish the
budgeting time periods.
*Note: If you check the check box to the left of a year line, a delete icon will appear next to the add
button. DO NOT DELETE a line if it has valid data as it will not be retrievable.
1. Click on Add button on a tool bar, then enter budget year. For example, 2021.
2. Enter starting day of the fiscal year. Example 01/01/21
Page | 5

EAMS v15 End User Documentation:
Work Planning Module
3. Enter number of budgeting periods in the period # column, for example 12 for the monthly
periods, or 52 for a weekly. NOTE: please make sure you decide to go with weekly or monthly
before setting up and saving your work.
4. Enter 1 in the Frequency number column if we budget on a monthly or weekly basis. It means
one period per month or per week. Note: if you budget on a quarterly basis you may enter 3
since there are three months in a single quarter.
5. Using drop down selection in the Unit column select budgeting units (weeks, months, etc.)
6. Click in the Default check box to indicate that this is a current budget we are going to work on.
7. Select from the date format drop down lookup the date format you want to be displayed
8. Manual Entry: there are two options here.
• Crew Days: will be calculated automatically base on the current month and year when the
Current Year button and the Hours button is clicked.
• Percentage: workdays shown in the year details grid at the bottom of the screen, are
calculated based on percentage template that is setup under tab ‘Percentage Templates M.’
9. Leave the Budget Factors blank for now, it will be explained later
10. Default Template: you will need to setup the template under Tab M and update it here.
11. Click on Current Year button to select the working days for each month. You can change the
working days by changing the numbers directly and working hours for each day by clicking on
the hour buttons and view the changes. Click on Save Changes button if you want to keep the
changes and click on Save button on the top of the current year table.
12. Number of monthly working days can be edited from this screen by clicking on specific month
13. In the Budget Factors columns enter any additional cost required if needed for this budget to be
added on top for labor, equipment, material, non-general funds, etc. (often left as default)
• For instance, if you need to increase 10% to the total labor cost, you will put 1.10. So, if
your total labor cost is $100.00, then the total labor cost for the budget is $110.00.
14. Click Save when Complete
15. Repeat for past/future years if desired
System Equipment Setup
System Equipment Type Setup allows to setup equipment types or groups based on its functionality
which will be used for planning. For example, using dump trucks, sweepers, and paving equipment for
performing specific activities. This is the same setup choice as under Setup > Tables. Additional
equipment types can be added if required. Enter hourly rate for equipment usage and estimated
percentage of downtime (for example: a dump truck on average is used at 89% of its capacity, the rest
11% of time is spent on repairing it and performing a PM tasks.
Page | 6

EAMS v15 End User Documentation:
Work Planning Module
1. Click Add to Add a new Type
2. Enter Billing Rates, and Remarks if required then Save upon completion.
• Rate/Hr.: will be used under option A. (work planning)
• Down Time %: will be used under option B which is in the report section “Recourse
Requirement report’ for Equipment only.
• Billing/Hr: will be used under the “Actual Entry,“ menu section. This is the same as Billing
Rate for Equip Type under Setup.
Materials Setup
This menu choice allows to setup categories of materials to be used. For example, for road repairs
different type of concrete may be used. Here we will identify just a generic group of materials - called
Class.
1. Click on New, then enter material class, description, then unit name (example concrete we
would measure in cubic feet, then cost per unit.
2. Click Save
Labor Setup
This table is the setup for Trades and Trade rates. Trades can also be set up from the Setup > Tables.
For example, Lead Utilities Operator $96.49/hr. Click on New, then enter labor trades and rates. Click on
Save when finished.
Page | 7

EAMS v15 End User Documentation:
Work Planning Module
Activity Programs Setup
(Planning menu, Option N.)
This screen must be done here in Work Planning module.
Page | 8

EAMS v15 End User Documentation:
Work Planning Module
A group of individual activities is called a program. Example, street repair can be a Program. It consists of
a variety of activities (tasks), such as sweeping, paving, removing old pavements, etc.
- Deleting a line: highlight a line and click on delete (scissors). If the line is blank, save it then delete.
Activity Percentage Distribution Template
(Planning menu, Option M.)
This template will be used under Option S (calendar setup) and Option K. Basically, this menu choice
allows to replace a tedious repeatable data entry by setting up a template which can be reused. This
template is used to set up the percentage of activities for each budgeting period. For example, streets
sweeping represents 8% of total monthly work. You may establish different percentages for different
periods for example June sweeping represents 8% of total work, but in July due to upcoming holidays
and big crowds it will represent 12 % of total work.
You may set up a template for sweeping with 8% activities per each month must be total to 100% for the
entire year. Enter template id in a template field, then enter % per each month, then click on Save
button on the right side of the window to save the template. You can save multiple different templates
as you need. Templates are yearly dependent. When you are in this screen, the options you have are
the buttons on the right-hand side.
Note: you can enter your own numbers if it adds up totally 100. The number is the percentage number
Setup Buttons and Options
• New/Add: create a new template
• Calculate Highlight Rows: highlight (Ctrl + left mouse clicks) the months you want to calculate
percentage of work equal to 100%, then click this bottom.
• Save: to save your template and changes.
• Select/Return allows you to select a different template then apply to the plans by clicking on Get
Default icon from another screen such as Option L.
Page | 9

EAMS v15 End User Documentation:
Work Planning Module
• Whole Number: if this box is checked, you can only enter an integer in the percentage fields. No
decimal numbers.
Pay Type
The Pay Type table allows you to create different calculations of hourly cost for Labor pay. When labor
entries are made for a technician in a work order or in direct entry, you can use the pay type field to
select a pay type from this table to be applied to that entry. The formula you see here will adjust the
labor rate for the labor entry.
1. Click add to add a new pay type.
2. Give it a name and description.
3. You have three ways to manipulate the standard base pay rate:
4. HrFactor Pay = This value is a multiplier to the base pay rate. 1.0 is no change, 1.5 is time and a
half, 2.0 is doubletime.
5. Hrfactor Xtra= This value will add to hourly calculation. Example Susan has an hourly pay rate of
$25.00. If the pay rate we apply has a value of 2 in the Hrfactor Xtra, Susan’s rate will be
calculated at $27.00 per hour ($25+2).
6. Flat rate= This adds a flat amount for each entry. It would be used if you have a call out bonus
paid if a technician is called out during the middle of the night etc. A Flat rate of $200.00 will
add $200.00 to the normal hourly rate for a labor entry. Example John was called out during the
night to solve a crisis. He worked for 4 hours. His hourly rate is $30.00. 30x4=120+ 200 flat call
out rate =$320.00
7. Put a check mark in your default pay rate type checkbox, and it will be applied to labor entries
by default.
Page | 10

EAMS v15 End User Documentation:
Work Planning Module
Activity Description
(Planning menu, Option L.)
This menu choice allows you to create Activity Codes. An Activity code describe in plain English specific
activities steps. The Activity code is a key element in Work Planning. It tracks “what work was
performed”. The Activity code can be linked to the Activity Programs. Multiple Activity Codes can be link
to one Activity Program.
For instance, we have Activity Program of Road Repair. We can link different Activity Codes to this
Activity Program such as Sweeping, Patching, Curb Painting, etc.
Note: always save before leaving the screen.
To change the Activity Distribution Percentage:
1. Click on Get default icon on the tool bar and select distribution template (from the previous (M)
menu choice) to link to this activities by using Select/Return button, then click OK to save.
2. If you made any changes to the Activity after creating the Work Planning, you must select other
activity, save; then re-select the activity, and Save to apply the new changes.
3. If you made changes to the description after creating the Working Planning, it will not apply the
current work planning. You can add the descriptions directly on the work planning by clicking on
the Edit Task, save it, then click on Edit Task again to close. Another way to apply the text
changes is to use option U.
Page | 11

EAMS v15 End User Documentation:
Work Planning Module
• Activity Code: example 0001 for paving, then description
• Activity Program: (was previously established, example roads repairs), M option.
• Inventory Unit: this was done in MaintStar Setup Module, Unit of Measure (example linear foot).
The Inventory Unit can be typed in on this screen only. Inventory Unit and Work Unit don’t
necessarily have to be the same.
• Work Unit: this was done in MaintStar Setup Module, Unit of Measure
• Same as Labor: if this box is checked, the qty work unit will be calculated the same as the unit of
the labor cost. Normally, in most cases this box should not be checked; but, for Meetings
example above, this box should be checked since you don’t have the quantity for meetings; so,
the qty is the ‘same as labor’
• Work Location: comes from Maintstar Setup Module, locations setup
• Low and High: not used at this point
The four windows below are text instructions for the project. See screen shot above. You must fill them
out before going to Option A, or you can leave it blank and fill it in later under Option A., Edit Task.
• Description of Work
• Planning Criteria
• Work Method, Check Point
• Note
Management Unit (Previously called -Activity System) Management Unit Setup
(Planning menu, Option K.)
Note: each level MUST be saved before next level is entered. Each level has its own Labor, Equipment,
and Material Available.
Page | 12

EAMS v15 End User Documentation:
Work Planning Module
This portion of setup may be quite challenging to comprehend. We recommend on-site assistance and
training to provide proper guidance as well as insurance that it is done right.
The Management Unit is a way to structure a numerical code sequence which represents hierarchical
levels in the structure of the organization. The code structure indicates the level and relationship of
each work group in the hierarchy. The numerical coding has a purpose and must be created in the
following format.
When we do work planning, MaintStar allows us to plan for multiple departments which may be
structured in hierarchical order. Example the planning to be done for a department (first level) which
consists of the following sub departments or units (level 2). For instance, under “Public Works” you may
find:
1-Streets
2-Parks
3-Sewer
4-Waste Water and so on…
The streets department may consist of two following sub departments (level 3)
Highways, Local Roads, and so on…
We can budget for the entire Public Works with drill down up to 8 levels. With such capabilities you may
budget for practically any size of operation (remember, to locate any individual in the entire 6 billion
universe we may need just about 7 levels-Country, City, Street, etc.)
Management Unit (MUST BE UNIQUE). It can be a department of organization for which we are setting
the plan. Management Unit can be also a specific project, which needs to be tracked. It is identified by
the Management Number which is a specific account or cost center where cost is charged. It can be
broken down in hierarchical order up to 8 levels-for management reporting. Make sure to click on Save
(OK) button for each administrative Number or before exiting the screen.
The Management Unit Number (accounting number) consists of 8 levels (displayed at a top of the
screen-8 fields). We use dashes in this example to show different levels of reporting structure and
indicate separate fields of entry.
Each layer down in the organization adds an additional digit to the Management Unit number.
The example of a Management Unit Number is 111PB can be entered in the first left field (up to 5
alpha-numeric characters)-we will call this field first level. For example, 111PW can be Public Works
Department. Then one alpha numeric character can be entered in each of next 7 fields. -we will call
these sub levels
If we add another character (1) to the next field, we will have for example:
Streets sub department UNDER Public Works 111PW-1
Under Streets sub department-Signs department 111PW-1-1
Under Streets sub department-General Maintenance sub department 111PW-1-2
Parks sub department UNDER Public Works 111PW-2 and so on.
Page | 13

EAMS v15 End User Documentation:
Work Planning Module
Example: We entered 111PW-1, then Save.
To enter the next Management Unit #, 111PW-2 just override the last character of previous entry, for
example character 1 with 2, then click on Save. Now we have entered two accounting numbers 111PW-1
and 11PW-2.
To view the previous Management Unit number, use Green left pointing arrow. To view the next Admin
No. use right Green arrow or click on the Open Search to search for other Management Units.
Each level of Management Unit Number (Cost Account No) needs to be linked with the corresponding
Management Unit (project, for example).
Basically, Management Unit as mentioned above is a project, which needs to be tracked. The cost will be
charged to specific Accounting Number – we call it Management Unit Number which we just finished
setting up in our example. Now we are going to set up a linkage between Management Unit and
corresponding Admin. Number. Another words, we need to indicate which projects are charged to
which accounts.
Please enter all Assets in the asset section which are identified as equipment. They are created in the
asset section of MaintStar. Equipment use will be planned for and tracked in the Work Plan. Equipment
would be vehicles such as trucks, graders, dozers, and other heavy equipment. Equipment could also be
smaller items such as mowers, generators etc.
Then come back and using Drop down windows select specific Equipment-(right side of the screen) for
displayed Management Unit Number Streets Repairs. Then save.
To assign more Systems to next Management Unit Number, override information in a Management Unit
Number field by typing it over, then link is with Management Unit using drop down window, then Save
after each entry. This linkage is mandatory.
Note: Each System linked to specific accounting level can be entered only once and cannot be reused for
a different Administrative Number. All linkages must be unique. Example Project A (Management Unit A)
will be always charged to Administrative Number 11PW-1. You cannot charge the same project A to
another Admin. Number 111PW-12, or 11AB-124,etc.
Deleting or Changing Management Unit
Go to Management Unit menu, open the search link, select the Management Unit you need to delete or
change, click the check box on the line for the management unit you want to delete. The delete icon will
appear over the list. click the delete trash can to delete.
After entering Management Unit information, we can proceed to the next step. At the bottom of the
screen, we show 12-month calendar (can be also setup on a weekly basis-up to 52 weeks). This
information comes from Calendar setup (Planning menu, sub Option R). This calendar can be set up
based on 8 working hours per day-default. Or 9 and 10 hours per day if required. This calendar also
indicates number of working days per month (excluding weekends)
Page | 14

EAMS v15 End User Documentation:
Work Planning Module
If you check boxes on the left side, it will include weekends and holidays. The holidays schedule setup is
under Maintstar Security module). You may override the number of working days available per each
month right on the screen, then Save.
Entering Labor, Equipment, and Material Resources.
The next step is to enter departmental resources required to each level to perform all jobs. Basically, we
will enter labor available (Labor Trades and number of people per trade, then Materials available and
Equipment available to perform a job. For example, Streets department has 10 drivers, 3 electricians, 5
sign inspectors and 10 trucks.
For each accounting level you can set up this information. The setup for each level or department is
independent, so we will not roll up labor and equipment resources at this moment to an upper level. It
will be done through reporting later.
Click on specific administrative accounting field (up to 8 levels) then click on Tab -Labor Available-top of
the screen. The labor entry screen will be displayed. Click on New, then enter specific trades and
quantity of people per trade. Upon completion click on Save. You may enter as many trades as you like.
Upon completion Click on Equipment Available Tab and enter equipment information. Upon
completion Click on Materials Available Tab and enter materials information. Repeat this entry for each
accounting Administrative Number code AND each Administrative System. Exit the current window or
the previously open window.
The first part of the general setup is completed. Now we are ready for a Planning Screen Setup
Work Planning Screen Setup
Planning Menu, Option A.
• The bottom section shows the budgets for the whole Management Unit that includes one or
more activities, with the total Labor Days for all Activities, and total Daily Employees for all
activities. The Planned Budget in the middle right hand side is the planned budget for one
activity of the current screen.
• The middle section shows the percentage distribution template, labor days, and crew days for
the current activity.
• The Left and Right Green Arrows will display all activities within the Admin System, or the next
admin system.
• Edit Task icon: allows you to edit the activity tasks. Click on the icon to edit. Click on the icon
again to turn it off.
Type: select Activity
• Code: you must type in the exact activity code that was done under option K
• Image Location: double click on the line and look for your image, then Save and exit
Page | 15

EAMS v15 End User Documentation:
Work Planning Module
Click on the New button to obtain the Working Planning #.
Note: make sure to Select Admin Sys and Activity Code before clicking on Save button for the plan to be
calculated properly.
Note: the system is designed as a planning financial and management tool, not as a fixed program.
Meaning that you can use this menu option to manipulate the program in different ways. Upon setup
completion you would need to manipulate this information to obtain a specific result.
This screen provides an annual plan visual information on a monthly –12 months (or weekly-52 weeks)
basis for labor days and cost distribution per specific activity.
The initial selection whether the planning is to be done on the weekly or monthly basis is under Planning
Module Menu, Option R-Calendar setup. Please do not switch from weekly to monthly planning at your
discretion or vice versa. This is a one-time setup. Decide up front and stay with it until the end of the
planning year.
This screen allows us to link activity to each Administrative System, (specific department or project) so
we can calculate later a monthly basis labor requirements per Administrative System.
An Management Unit may have multiple activities attached to it. . For example, for Streets departments
the following activities are to be performed:
• Sweeping
• Streets repairs
• Signs and traffic lights inspection
Page | 16

EAMS v15 End User Documentation:
Work Planning Module
Linking Management Unit with corresponding Activity
Let Maintstar know which activities need to be performed per Administrative System, a linkage needs to
be established. You MUST complete all fields in Activity Code (option K) before linking to Management
Unit. Click on New, select Management Unit using drop down window, then select Activity code. For
instance, Management Unit = Streets, Activity Code=Asphalt Repairs, Sweeping, etc.
Labor Tab – Equipment Tab – Material Tab
Note: make sure to click on Save (OK button) for the Work Planning to be calculated properly. If changes
are made elsewhere after the Work Planning has been done, make sure to click on Save for the work
planning to be re-calculated.
Labor Tab (labor cost)
This is hourly rate, and Qty is 1 person, not 1 hour. Click on labor tab, then click on Add Detail icon on
the top toolbar (icon looks like a clipboard) if you need to add a worker. Click on Trade drop down box to
select a worker; description and rates should be filled in automatically, this was set up under option N.
(Labor Trades). You can manually change the rate if you wish. To add another Trade just hit enter or
click on Add Detail. Total Labor Rate will be multiplied by the hours a day based on the calendar setup
template. Total Labor Cost = Total Rate * Hrs a Day * Crew Days.
To add additional workers, click on the Add Detail icon again. To delete worker, click on the worker,
then click on the Del Detail icon (red scissors). Clicking on the wrong scissors will delete the Work
Planning#, but you will be confirmed.
Equipment Tab (equipment cost)
This is hourly rate, and Qty is 1 equipment. Click on Equipment Tab, then click on Add Detail to add
Equipment. Add and delete should be the same as Labor above. These pieces of equipment were set up
under option P. To delete equipment, click on the equipment, then click on the Red Scissors. Total
Equipment Rate will be multiplied by the hours a day based on the calendar setup template.
Total Equipment Cost = Total Equipment Rate * Hrs. a Day * Crew Days.
Material Tab (material cost)
This is the daily rate. Click on Material Tab, then click on Add Detail to add material. These materials
were set up under option O. Add and delete should be the same as Labor above. To delete a material,
click on a material, then click on the Red Scissors. Material total rate will be multiplied by the crew days.
Total Material Cost = Total Material Rate * Crew Days
Work Units
This is a yearly work units. Example: 100 trees a year, can be referred as inventory.
Qty per Unit
This is known as ‘level of effort’. If it is 1, then you can trim 100 trees a year. But if you can only do 50
trees a year, then the qty per unit is 0.5. This is just one example. Different methods can be used
depending on what and how you want to plan.
Total Work Qty
Work Units times Qty per Units. (100 * 1) = 100
Page | 17

EAMS v15 End User Documentation:
Work Planning Module
Daily Work Qty (meaning a day of work qty, and it does not have to be everyday)
This is your estimation of how many trees you can do a day. Some call it ADP (Average Daily
Productivity)
Unit Cost
Unit cost = planned budget / total work qty.
Unit Hours:
(next to Unit Cost) how long it takes to do one unit is:
[(Labor Days) (8 hrs. a day)] / Total Work Qty
Crew Size
Each worker is counted as 1, under Labor Tab, if you have 2 workers, then crew size is 2, or if you have
1.5 workers, then crew size is 1.5.
Crew Days
Equals Total Work Qty divides Daily Work Qty.
Crew Days = Total Work Qty / Daily Work Qty
These crew days then will be divided into 12 months. This is a yearly plan
Budget Factor: check this box if you want to apply your Budget factor that was setup under
Option S.- Calendar Setup (scroll to the right)
Labor Days: equals crew size times crew days (labor days = crew size * crew days)
Employees = Labor Days of Budgets Month / Workdays of that month
This is the total number of all employees required for this period, for all activities, and for this admin
system only.
Lump Sum Budget, Non-General Fund: enter these amounts into the boxes if you have any to be added
to Planned Budget.
Budget Factor Box: if this box is checked, the total Planned Budget will be calculated based on your
settings under Option R, and is calculated as follow:
• Labor (Budget Factor) = (Total Labor Cost * Hrs. a Day * Crew Days * %Labor Factor), then add to
the total Planned Budget (option S)
• Equipment (Budget Factor) = (Total Equip. Cost * Hrs. a Day * Crew Days * %Equip. Factor), then
add to the total planned budget (option S)
• Material (Budget Factor) = (Total Material Cost * Crew Days * %Material Factor), then add to the
total planned budget (option S)
• Lump Sum Budget (Budget Factor) = (Lump Sum Budget * %Lump Sum Budget Factor), then add
to the total planned Budget
• Non General Fund (Budget Factor) = (Non General Fund * % Non-General Fund Factor), then add
to the total planned Budget
• Planned Budget: this is the total amount of the budget for the whole year.
Page | 18

EAMS v15 End User Documentation:
Work Planning Module
• Planned Budget=[[(labor rate * Wk Hr per Day) + (equipment rate * Wk Hr per Day) + (material
cost per Day)] * (crew days) ] + (Lump Sum if any)
• Add if required any overhead Lump Sum Cost and Non-General Funds Cost.
Enter work units and quantity per unit (example: total streets =100 each street is 10 miles Enter average
daily productivity example 5 miles/day. The information can be entered only in yellow fields.
Information in gray fields is for viewing only.
• Click on Drop down window and select trade. Enter hours required per activities. The rate will be
displayed from the previous setup. Click on Add Details button on a tool bar to add another
record if required.
• Click on Equipment Tab and setup Equipment required per attached activities. Click on Add
Details button to add another equipment
• Click on Materials Tab and add materials required. Click on Save upon completion.
• To add more activities to the same administrative system, click on New button on a Tool Bar,
then select the same Management Unit and then select next activities from a drop-down
window. Then repeat above steps. Click on Save upon each entry completion.
• To view next activity for the same Management Unit use red arrows on a tool bar. If that was
the last activity, you will be prompted for the next Management Unit displayed.
• To add the Tasks for the Work Planning, click on the Edit Task icon on the toolbar. Finish your
tasks, then click on the Edit Task icon again to close. This task will be printed when you print out
the plan. Printouts of the plans will show all your resource requirements used in the plan.
• To add new Management Unit, Click on New, then select Administrative System, then repeat
steps above.
• The system automatically assigns a unique consecutive work plan number to each work plan
sheet-top right. It also stamps date and time
• At the bottom the screen there are two windows are displayed.
• The following calculated information will be displayed in a gray fields (no editing)
• Crew Size, Crew Days, Unit Cost, Budget
• The middle window: 12 months or 52 weeks- shows planning information for a single activity
• The table is displayed with monthly (or weekly) information and shows projected percentage of
a single activity scheduled monthly. For example, if we want to distribute activity evenly through
entire year, we need to input 8,34% per months, which will total approx. 100% for an entire
year.
• Labor days- shows total annual and monthly or weekly labor days required per single activity.
• The bottom window:12 months or 52 weeks- shows planning summary budget $ information for
all activities for the whole Management Unit
• Employees-Number of employees required per month or week to accomplish all activities. This
number could have a decimal point example, 10,5 employees
Page | 19

EAMS v15 End User Documentation:
Work Planning Module
• The setup is completed. The next step is entering actual daily data in a system to track
completed work.
• Note: After the Work Planning is set up properly, the main three factor keys here are now the
Work Units, Qty Per Unit, and Daily Work Qty. You will manipulate these three numbers to fit
your plan. Let’s look at a few examples: 100 meetings, 5hrs each meetings, 500hrs total. There
are three different ways to manipulate these three numbers.
Example 1:
Total Hours: 500hrs 500hrs 500hrs
Work Unit: 1year 100meetings 5hrs
Qty Per Unit (effort): 500hr 5hrs a meeting 100meetings
As you can see total hours are 500hrs, but there are three different ways to manipulate these numbers.
A) Adjust the total hours for the whole year B) You want 100 meetings a year, but you want to adjust
how many hours a meeting C )You want 5hrs a meeting, and change the number of meetings.
Example 2:
-Wk Units: 12 meetings
-Qty per Unit: 1 (hour per meeting)
-Total Wk Qty: 12 hrs of meetings
-Daily Work Qty: 16 hrs (assuming you have 2 workers, 8hrs a day. This is the maximum productivity of
work they can do a day)
-Unit Hour: 1 (this has to be 1 when dealing with hours)
Example 3:
-Wk Units: 12 meetings
-Qty per Unit: 1 (1 day a month)
-Total Wk Qty: 12 days of meetings
-Daily Wk Qty: 2 days (assuming you have 2 workers, 8hrs a day. This is the maximum productivity of
work they can do a day. Since unit is in days, 16hrs would be 2 days)
-Unit Hour: 1 (this has to be 1 when dealing with hours)
Example 4:
-Wk Units: 1 year
-Qty per Unit: 1200 (draining per year)
-Total Wk Qty: 1200 drainings
-Daily Wk Qty: 5 drainings a day
Example 5:
-Wk Units: 1200 miles
-Qty per Unit: 1 (hour per mile)
-Total Wk Qty: 1200 hrs
-Daily Wk Qty: 5 hrs a day
The above examples are more like planning strategy to meet your budgets or your man hours.
Page | 20

EAMS v15 End User Documentation:
Work Planning Module
Adjusting Labor days calculation
To change the labor days, you must adjust the Qty per Unit as follows:
Labor Days Desired (A)
(A / B * C / D = E)
Actual Work Entry
Planning menu, Option F.
The Actual work entry screen has two purposes:
• It is used to make new work planning entries for Labor, Equipment, Materials, and Work
Quantity quickly. The entries are made in a grid like the LEM section of Work Orders.
• It is used to retrieve previous entries for editing
The screen is divided into the top half and the bottom half. The bottom half is a grid used to make new
entries or to display and edit entries that were previously made. The top half of the screen is used to set
up common values for several of the fields in the bottom half grid. By setting them up first in the top
half, there are fewer fields that will need to be selected for the entries in the bottom half. This helps you
make the entries quicker and easier.
Page | 21

EAMS v15 End User Documentation:
Work Planning Module
To make Actual Work Planning entries:
Make sure the bottom half of screen is clear. Use clear field button if needed.
• Set the common values for your entries in the fields at the top
• Set the date
• Set the Management Unit and Activity
• Set Location code and account number if used.
• Click add entry at the bottom area.
A new line will appear with the entry type set for labor because labor is the most common entry.
Complete the line by choosing the technician’s name in the code/ID field. Enter Hours worked (use
fractions, 1.5 for and hour and a half). Pay type if different from the default. The values from the top
half should be filled in on the bottom automatically.
To add a second line, you can use the ‘add entry’ button or press the enter key. The next line will
appear, and the same type will be selected. In this example since we made a labor entry, the next line
will be labor. When you are ready to change to another type of entry such as equipment or materials,
Page | 22

EAMS v15 End User Documentation:
Work Planning Module
you can change the type drop down. The field will change by typing the first letter such as L for labor, E
for equipment, M for materials etc.
Complete the fields for this entry such as the Id for the person and hours etc. You can also add crews
with the add crew button. (Crews are created in the Work Order menu section. Follow the same pattern
for equipment, materials and contractor.
Work Quantity Entry
Work Quantity entry is dependent on the activity chosen. Different activities have different units of
measurements for Work Quantity. Because of this, make sure your entry before the work quantity, has
the correct activity code listed. The Work Quantity will be displayed with the correct unit of measure for
the previous activity. Example activity potholes, unit of measure might be a count of potholes. Striping
might have a unit of measure the number of miles of striping performed etc. The Validate button,
saving the entries.
The validate button can be used to check that your entries have entered correctly and required fields
have been entered correctly. When you save the entries, all correctly entered entries will go away on
the screen. They will be saved in the database. IF a line has a problem it will remain on the screen for
you to correct and save again.
APPLY ALL Button: USE WITH CAUTION! When the top half window is filled-in with all the information,
you can use this button to apply all the top information to all your entries on the bottom half screen.
Again, it will APPLY TO ALL OF YOUR ENTRIES, NOT ONE. If you need to make one change to your entry,
just go directly to your entry and make the change to simplify your confusion.
Actual Entry - Work Order Entry
*PLEASE NOTE: THIS FUNCTIONALITY HAS CHANGED SIGNIFICANTLY IN VERSION 15*
Actual entries can record activities that are part of a work order or are stand alone.
Actual entries can be used to record events that DO NOT have a related work order. For example, If
you want to record some activities that have no asset but you want to record time and hours, such
attending meetings, or time off etc., the Actual entry screen is a great way to track these activities.
But if you DO have a work order already started, you can make your LEM entries here on the Actual
entries screen if you prefer, instead of making the entries on the work order. To do this, the work
order should be created, and you should know the work order number that you are recording time,
materials, and work quantity to.
You will see a work order field at the top section and on the individual entry lines.
Page | 23

EAMS v15 End User Documentation:
Work Planning Module
When you have the Work Order identified in your entry lines, (Labor, Equipment, Material,
Contractor, and Work Quantity) THE ENTRIES WILL BE PUSHED TO THE WORK ORDER WHEN YOU
SAVE.
This is a NEW function and very powerful. You now have the choice of entering your LEM entries on
the work order directly OR using the very popular Actual entry screen.
Entry Tips
This menu choice is designed to enter actual work completed. The entry can be done daily, weekly etc.
Tips for speedy data entry. If you would like to eliminate mouse usage for drop down windows data
selection, for example in a Type field enter first character (example L for Labor or Alt + Arrow Down).
The same for Code and other dropdown fields.
Use the enter key to indicate that a data entry is completed in a current entry line and to create a new
line of entry. Some previously entered information will be defaulted from the previous line of entry, to
speed up repeatable data entry.
To delete a record which is not currently displayed, click on Find to select the record then click on
Scissors on a Tool Bar to delete. Then click on Save. If the top half screen and bottom half screen are too
confusing for you, please ignore the top half screen and just make your entries right on the bottom half
screen.
Page | 24

EAMS v15 End User Documentation:
Work Planning Module
CLEAR FIELDS button:
is used to clear the top half window; so when the new button is clicked, there will be no default data
filled-in in the fields of your new entry.
Retrieving Entries
The actual entry screen can be used to retrieve entries already made for purpose of review or editing.
RETRIEVE button: retrieving old transactions for editing purposes. The Fields at the top of the screen
can act as filters to search existing records. Fill in the fields related to your search such as:
• Dates from and to, for a certain date range.
• Select a particular management Unit or activity code.
If you leave any field empty, the empty field will not be filtered and all values for that field will be
shown. First, do a lookup and pick an entry, then Retrieve will retrieve related entries that have
matching Admin System and Activity. Click the Green Retrieve button to activate the search. The results
will be shown in the table.
In Editing Mode:
RETRIEVE button: retrieving original old transactions for editing purposes. First, do a lookup and pick an
entry, then Retrieve will retrieve and filter related entries that have matching Admin System, Activity,
Page | 25

EAMS v15 End User Documentation:
Work Planning Module
and Location. If different changes are made to these related transactions, retrieve feature will not
consider them as orginal transactions, and will not retrieve them as related transactions.
CLEAR FIELDS button: to clear the information on the top half screen.
CLEAR SCREEN button: Clears the bottom half of the screen
Work Planning Reports
Rollup/Summary & Group Length Concept:
This feature is for the reports and it works the same throughout MaintStar wherever it is available.
- Rollup/Summary: is used when multiple Adm Systems are selected.
- Group Length: is how far you want to rollup
Example:
- Management Unit # 00001 is M&O maintenance
- Management Unit # 000012 is Road Administration
- Management Unit # 00001221 is Road maintenance
If we ran a report with these three management units selected and checked Rollup/Summary with
Group Length of 5, then we will have the total cost maintenance for the park. As you can see M&O
Maintenance #00001 has 5 digits. If we don’t check Rollup/Summary, then we would see a detail report
of all three Management Unit In other words, Rollup/Summary provides the flexibility of summary cost
report for any level. Let’s look at another example below.
Running Reports
Resource Requirements (Planning Menu Option B.)
Page | 26

EAMS v15 End User Documentation:
Work Planning Module
This screen will give you an overview of the resource requirements such as Labors, Equipment,
Materials, that are used under each Management Unit Number. There are three radio buttons for Labor
Requirements, Equipment Requirements, Material Requirements.
• Management Unit: from the dropdown list select a management unit for the report. You can
add additional management units. The ones you have selected appear below the field on the
screen. Click on each Tab - Labor, Equipment, or Material, one by one to view your resource
requirements report.
• Labor Requirements Radio Button
• This screen will show the Labor Resource Requirements for the Management Unit number you
selected.
• The second column will show how many Labor Resources available for each type of labor. This
available labor number was set up under Option J. (Management Unit - Labor Available tab).
• The third column is the header (label) for each row
• The fourth column shows the total number of workdays for each type of worker for your
Management Unit # you selected. Ex: you could have Maintenance Worker for one category,
and Supervisor for another. (Note: Workers and Supervisors are created under Option A – Labor
Tab).
• (Yearly) Workdays = Number of Maintenance Worker * Crew days; the same for Supervisor, etc.
• The Total Workdays then will be divided by 12 to find Monthly Workday.
• Then take the number in each month divide by the number of Calendar Workdays (that was set
up under Calendar Setup Option R., Current Year Button) to find the number of Employee for
each day.
• Take the Resource Labor Available minus Employee each day to obtain the remaining available
Page | 27

EAMS v15 End User Documentation:
Work Planning Module
• The Total Manpower: is the sum of all workdays and workers required for the plan. (see below)
Equipment Requirements Tab
This screen is almost the same as the Labor screen above.
• To obtain the Equipment Days: Take the Equipment Quantity times Crew Days. (Equipment Qty
was created under Option A – Equipment Tab),
• Take the total Equipment Days divide by 12 to find the number of days the equipment is used in
a month.
• Take the number in each month divide by the number of Calendar Working Days = Qty needed a
day.
Material Requirement Tab
This screen shows the total number of Material Requirement for the whole year.
• Total = Material Qty * Crew Days (this was created under Option A., Material tab)
• Monthly Material = Total / 12
Work Planning Reports
Planning Menu, Option C.
Condition Tab
This screen will allow you to run reports by Multiple Management Unit, or by Multiple Activities, or by
Multiple Programs. If you leave all boxes blank, the report will show all your Work Planning, and that
will take a bit longer time to run if you have a big database.
Rollup/Summary and Group Length check box:
Page | 28

EAMS v15 End User Documentation:
Work Planning Module
Group Length is part of Rollup/Summary. The Group Length option is unavailable when the Rollup box is
not checked. If Rollup box is not checked, the report will show the data in detail by default.
-Labor = Rate * 8hrsaday * Crew Days
-Equipment = Rate * 8hrsaday * Crew Days
-Material = Rate * Crew Days
Percent / Labor Days Distribution Tab
Select the radio button labeled Percent/Labor Days Distribution.
This screen will show the percentage and labor days distribution for each month throughout the whole
year. This was done under option R., M. and K. The labor days come from your Working Planning (A),
then divided by 12 months
Page | 29

EAMS v15 End User Documentation:
Work Planning Module
Actual Work Report
Planning Menu, Option G.
This powerful report has many ways it can be configured. The fields at the top of the screen filter the
report data by date, Management Unit activity etc. If you do not set a value in a field, all data for that
value will be displayed.
The radio buttons select 4 different versions of the report. Set the conditions you want them click run to
display the report.
• Actual Work in summary and in detail format
• Cost in detail and summary
Page | 30

EAMS v15 End User Documentation:
Work Planning Module
Work Status Report
Planning Menu, Option H.
This report runs very complicated and sophisticated calculations. This report runs dramatically faster in
version 15. This screen gives you the report of Period to Date and Year to Date of all the plans you
created under option A. See Option A for further info. and could be from W/O’s. Run your Bi-Weekly
reports to find out what w/o’s were done for the work planning. Throughout our manual we use 8Hrs a
day of work.
Page | 31

EAMS v15 End User Documentation:
Work Planning Module
Work Status (PTD/YTD) Report format (radio button): please see Work Planning (Option A) for further
details of where the numbers come from.
• Plan Days = Labor Days / 12
• Act Days = from Actual Work Entry or from W/O’s Labor Hrs. (4hrs or more = 1 day, 12hrs or
more= 2days), or MISC. Cost. The Labor Date, and Misc. Date is used here, not issued date or
target date. The same for parts. It is suggested that to enter all costs, except labor and material
cost, under Misc. Cost Tab so that MaintStar can generate the productivity report based on the
work quantity, and hours.
• Plan Qty = Daily Work Qty * Crew Days (option A)
• Act Qty = from Actual Work Entry or from W/O’s Misc. Cost
• Labor Days Annual Plan = Labor Days (option A)
• YTD Actual are all from the actual entry and, if any, from wo’s labor cost and misc. cost
• Work Qty Annual Plan = Total Work Qty (option A)
• YTD Actual are all from the actual entry and, if any, from wo’s labor cost and misc cost
• Total Cost Annual Plan = Planned Budget (option A)
• YTD Actual are all from the actual entry and, if any, from wo’s labor cost and misc cost
• Hour@Unit Annual Plan = Unit Hours (option A)
• YTD Actual are all from the actual entry and, if any, from wo’s labor cost and misc cost
• Cost@Unit Annual Plan = Unit Cost (option A)
• YTD Actual are all from the actual entry and, if any, from wo’s labor cost and misc cost
Page | 32

EAMS v15 End User Documentation:
Work Planning Module
Work Calendar Report format (radio button)
• Labor days = crew size * crew days
• Labor days then will be used to divide into 12months to obtain monthly labor days.
• Actual Daily Work Qty:
o Crew Size (for any particular day) = total # of hours of all crew members (A) / by largest
# of hours of any crew member (B)
o Equivalent crew day (C) = total hours of all crew members (A) / (crew size (D) * Standard
workday hours (E))
The above numbers are computed for each day per activity and admin. System. They are then summed
by each activity for all days of time in question. The average daily production = sum of all work quantity
(F) / sum of all equivalent crew days (C). An example for a 10-hour workday:
• 09/01/01 – Jim works 8 hours and Jake works 4 hours then leaves. Sara joins Jim and works 2
hrs. They install 5 signs.
• 09/02/01 – Jim works 5 hours and Jake works 3 hours and Sara works 5 hours. They install 4
signs.
• Calculations:
09/01/01: crew size (D) = (8+4+2) / 8 = 1.75; Equiv. crew day (C) = (8+4+2) / (1.75 *
10hrs/day) = .8
09/02/01: crew size (D) = (5+3+5) / 5 = 2.6; Equiv. crew day (C) = (5+3+5) / (2.6 *
10hrs/day) = .5
Work Qty (F) = 5 + 4 = 9 signs
Sum of Equiv. days = .8 + .5 = 1.3
ADP (average daily productivity or work qty) = 9 / 1.3 = 6.9
Overview report format (Radio Button): this screen will give you an overview of the last two screens.
Page | 33

EAMS v15 End User Documentation:
Work Planning Module
Planned Use Summary
Planning Manu, Option J.
This screen will give you a summary report of what you have created under Work Planning Option A
comparing with what you have used under Option F. Select your conditions then click on the Result tab
to run the report.
Rollover Duplication
Planning Menu, Option T
This screen allows you to duplicate your previous budget year to the new budget year. If “Apply New
Working Days” box is checked, new working days for the new year will be applied automatically. If it is
not checked, the new year will have the same working days as the old one.
BE CAREFUL!!! If you try to duplicate over an existing year, all you existing plans of that year will be
deleted. You will be confirmed before deleting.
Page | 34

EAMS v15 End User Documentation:
Work Planning Module
Budgets Adjustment
Planning Menu, Option U.
This screen allows you to adjust the funds to fit your plans. It can be increased or decreased by the
percentage or by the amount entered. You then can view the differences and decide to update the new
rates or to cancel out without making any changes. We offer a quick backup function so you can back
up before apply the new rates, and to restore right after at the moment you apply the new rates if you
accidently made a mistake. These backup and restore functions are not meant for database backup, and
they will not work on different versions of MaintStar.
Retrieve button: select your Management Unit, then click on this button to obtain activity budgets.
Page | 35

EAMS v15 End User Documentation:
Work Planning Module
• Final box: enter the final amount you want to see for all budgets to be calculated. The key here
is to enter the increase/decrease percentage number or the final number, and either to
calculate all budgets evenly or calculate only highlighted lines.
• Update W/Plan button: click on this button only if you are sure that you want to apply new
working budgets and to overwrite the existing budgets.
• Reduce: if this box is checked, the planning cost will be reduced; if not checked, it will increase.
• Run Calculation: click on this button to view the new Total Working Budgets or the Final
Budgets.
• Same Percentage: enter the percentage# to increase (box unchecked) / reduce (box checked) all
activities equally (the original budgets) or highlight the specific activities to be calculated.
• Direct Input: enter the amount directly into the yellow box where you want to reduce or
increase amount. The bottom Direct Input option and the top right Enter Data option have to
sync.
• Priority/Multi%: goes with top direct input option. First enter your priority number in the
Priority box, like 1 or 2 or 3, then setup Priority/Multi%, then run the calculation button.
• Highlight/Select Data allows you to run Calculations on the hilted lines only. Hold down Ctrl key
and left click to highlight.
• Enter Data allows you to enter the data directly to the budget yellow box and finish it with a tab.
Make sure the Top right Enter Data is selected.
• Apply New Rates: allows you to make changes (%) right on those small boxes for Labor,
Equipment, Material rates setup, and click on Update DB button. Then to apply to the working
planning, you must click on Update W/Plan button.
Page | 36

EAMS v15 End User Documentation:
Work Planning Module
• Select % Template allows to apply new % template without changing your template setup.
Works with Update W/Plan button.
• Activity Distribution and Text Description: if needed, you must make changes in your Activities
Distribution and text description first, then go here to apply the changes to the existing plans.
• Bottom Left Box: shows the different amount between the new working budget and original
budget.
• Bottom Right Box: shows the total of the total and the bottom left box.
Page | 37

