MAINTSTAR
VERSION 15
System Manual
28 Hammond Phone: 800-255-5675
Irvine California 92618 Email: WWW://Maintstar.com
1

2
Table of Contents
Section Page
Log On 4
Work Group 5
Work Orders 7
List view and Card View 8
Work Order Screen – Search Section 9
Work Order Screen – Tabs Section 12
Work Order Screen – Header Section 13
Work Order Screen – Asset Section 14
Work Order Screes – Task Section 15
Quick Look up 16
Starting a new Work Order 17
Making and deleting entries in fields 19
Searching in a field 20
Adding Assets 21
Adding LEM 25
History 27
Job site 28
Request tab 29
Related tab 30
Notifications 31
Plan 32
Log 33
Attachments 35
Issues and Answers 36
PM Scheduling 37
Templates 37
Nesting 46
Scheduling 51
Automatic Batch Issuing 53
PM Report 55
Security Introduction 58
Security > User 59
Security > Group Setup 64
Security > Screen Customization 66
Security > System Settings 67
Security > DB Config 68
Security > Global Data Change 69
Security > License 70
Security > Utilities 71
Setup Introduction 72
Setup > Tables 73
Setup > Labor 74
Setup > Customer 75
Setup > Vendor 76
Setup > Notification Template 76
Security > Workgroup 77
Setup > Address 86
Setup > GIS 87
Setup > KPI Dashboards 88
Setup > Jobs 90
Setup > Data Dictionary 91
Setup > RT Monitor 92
Notifications 96
Inventory Introduction
Inventory > Concepts 103
Inventory > Summary 105
Inventory > Receiving Transaction 109
Inventory > Issuing Transaction 110
Inventory > Mass Deletion 111

3
Inventory > Part Kit 112
Inventory > Inventory Reports 113
Inventory > ABC 114
Inventory > EOQ 117
Invoice
Invoice Summary 119
Past Due Report 120
Mass Deletion 121
Invoice setup 121
Purchase Order
Purchase Order Setup 126
PO Control 128
Regular PO 131
Blanket PO 132
Asset Management
Capital Planning 139
Replacement Schedules 140
Asset Rating Wizard 146
COF and Criticality Wizards 148
Lifecycles 154
Reports 154
POF and COF 164
Simulations 165
FLEET
Vehicles 171
Fuel Interface 173
Motor Pool 179
Fleet Reports 184
Asset Acquisition 196
Disposal 197
Work Planning
What is Work Planning 199
Setting Up 205
Calendar set up 206
System Equipment setup 209
Materials 210
Labor 211
Programs 212
Activities 216
Management Unit 219
Work Planning Screen 222
Actual Work Entry 228
Work Planning reports 234
Rollover Duplication 244
WORK REQUEST
Overview 247
Work Request settings 251
Customers 260
Portal 262
MaintStar Mobile 266
Logging in 267
Screens and menus 269
Screen layouts 279
Adding assets from the map 281
Tasks 286
LEM 287
Attachments and photos 290
Closing work orders 291
Reporting
Concepts 294
Setup 296
Query 301

4
Log on
To your assigned URL address
Enter Your User Id and Password and Select your
Work Group
Enter your Id and password
Select the ‘Profile’ you want to log into from the drop down. You may have only
one profile, or you will have more than one if you have a production and a test
environment for example.
Press ‘SUBMIT”. You will be taken to the Home Screen.

5
New Concept: The Workgroup
The’ Workgroup’ is a new concept in version 15.
It is in some ways like the “Modules” in version 14 and earlier. The “Modules”
separated the system into different groups of assets that different agency
departments would be working with. Each of these modules had their own set
of work orders and PMs. The ‘Modules” in version 14 were preset in the system
for Water, Storm Water, Streets, Sewer, Parks and the Regular work order.
In version 15, MaintStar now allows you to create your own groups. They are
now called “Work Groups”. You can define your work groups the way you
structure your business. You are no longer forced into the preset categories.
If your street crew also maintains storm water assets, they can be combined in
one work group. If you had several groups sharing the regular work order, each
of these groups can now have their own workgroup identity with select assets,
screen layout and printed work order form, independently. The workgroups are
created in the setup module and will be described in a different document.

6
System Home Screen
1. The Hamburger in the upper left of the screen toggles the menu for full
width or condensed view.
2. The label: “Full Menu” expands the menu. The label will change to “My
Menu”. Click on “My Menu” to change to a short version of the menu.
Click on the section headers to expand or contract them.
3. The Label at the top shows what screen you are on. You can set the
dashboard or a map as the home screen.
4. The Arrow in the upper right, opens a sliding panel. The panel can be set
to be the dashboard or a map. Note that the dashboard automatically
displays data for the workgroup selected in the workgroup dropdown. Hold
down your mouse to stretch the map wider. Note: You can open the map
while you are looking at work orders or in other parts of the system.
5. Log off the system. This is the selection of which work group is displayed.

7
Work Orders
1. Click on the menu section Work Order.
2. Then click the first menu item: Work
Order.
The Work Order screen will open.
NOTE: There are two different views of the work
order screen.
The Grid view has a search table at the top of the
screen and the selected work order from the
table is shown at the bottom of the screen.
The Card view shows the work orders from the
filtration in little cards to the left of the work
order.
You can switch between the two views with the
icon on the lower right of the screen.

8
Work order in the List view
Work Order in the Card view

9
The Work Order Screen
Table View
Section 1. The Search Section
• The work order Search Section sits on top of the screen. It displays or
hides a filtered list of work orders. Click on the label “List “to display or
hide the list.
• The work orders that are in the list will be seen in the list while you are
in the list view mode. The same work orders that are in the list will be
displayed as cards while you are in the card view mode.
Which mode works best for you is something for you to decide. The card view is
great when you have a shorter list of work orders to work with. The cards are
great when you want to move from one to another by clicking the card directly.
The card view displays thumbnail pictures of your primary attachment.
The list view shows you more information in the grid table. You can move up
and down through the work orders with the left and right arrows.

10
• Here the list is shown open. The work order that is highlighted in the list
is displayed in the Work Order section below. The arrows move you up
and down through the workorders in the search list. This is very similar
the “Make a scrolling list” feature that was very popular in previous
versions of MaintStar.
To filter the list, click on the word ’filter’.
This will open some search fields. Here you can select open close or both
for Status. Asset ID, Activity and other fields. The results list will change
automatically as you make selections.

11
You can add additional fields to search on with the wrench tool. Click the
wrench and you get a pop-up window. Here you can add an additional
field to the search as needed.

12
The Work Order Tabs
The work order is broken into a series of tab sections across the top.
• Details, is the primary work order section.
• New Term: LEM stands for Labor, Equipment and Material. Your
labor, equipment, contractors, materials and work quantity are
now together on the same screen. Work planning users will be
glad to see that Management unit and Activity are now on the
labor line. This means you can have multiple Activities in the
same work order!
• Job site is to indicate where the work is being done by address.
• Request tab – If the work order started as a request, the
information from the request will be here.
• Attachments stores pictures and files attached to the work order.
• The double arrows open a drop down with additional tabs for
asset history, Planning, Issue/ actions, Log and Notifications.
These less used tabs are here to keep the screen simpler. If you
want them to be shown you can click on one in the list. It will
open the tab.
• Notifications lets you activate a variety of notifications to staff for
the work order.
• Plan Allows you to record estimated costs and compare them to
actual costs.
• Log records history of data changes to the work order.
• Status records changes to the work in progress and work order
assignment and other related events.
• Issues and Actions records cause and solutions about the work
order. This is optional.

13
Section 3. The Work Order Header (top) Section
The header section contains basic information about the work order such as
issue date, target date (expected finish date), Work order closed date, work
order type and more.
In version 15 you have 3 levels of supervision for the completion of the work
order:
1. Assigned to
2. Crew Leader
3. Supervisor
This way, staff in these supervisory positions can track all their work easily.
Section 4 The Asset Section
Section 5 The Tasks
Wk in Progress´- Work in Progress is used to track steps and stages of the work
order. There is a Work in Progress in the header sect ion and on the asset level
as well.

14
Assets
MaintStar has two ways to display assets. One way is to show multiple assets in
a grid table. This is like the Infrastructure work orders in version 14. The other
way is to show one asset on the screen at a time. This display is like the
“Standard” work order view from version 14. Each work group setup has a
switch to make this selection for the work group.
You can use either display method for different workgroups. We would suggest
using the Standard Wo Layout for Facilities, Fleet, and Plant operations. The
other view is better for Infrastructure groups such as Streets, Storm Water and
Sewer. These groups typically work with multiple assets on a single work order
and it is helpful to see them in a grid table format.
You add assets with the green Add Asset button. You can add multiple assets
to the work order. You will need to save the asset with the save asset button
once you have selected it. You move through the different assets with the green
left and right arrow buttons. The green button with the three vertical hash marks
will show you a table with all assets together. The trash can is used to delete
the displayed asset. The blue check box next to the asset ID jumps you to the
asset setup screen for the displayed asset.

15
The Task Section
MaintStar version 15 has a great new feature. You can add one or more “tasks”
to each asset in your asset list.
Tasks are specific actions to be documented for each asset. A task could be
very simple such as click on the “Done” checkbox to record that that asset was
taken care of.
Tasks can be more complex, such as asking for a rating to be recorded for the
asset condition, or to update a meter reading. How tasks are set up will be
described in the setup document, but for now just be aware that the new feature
exists.

16
The Quick Look Up
In the upper right of the screen you will see a magnifying glass. This magnifying
glass will be your new friend. Click on the magnifying glass and a field appears.
When you know the number of the work order you are looking for, you can start
typing the number in this field. As you type, you will see matching work orders
being displayed. Click on the one you are looking for and it will open. NOTE;
This takes the place of the F10 lookup from version 14 and earlier.
Section 7 Displaying the Map or Dashboard.
While you are on the Work order,
the Side panel is closed. The
panel can be set to show either the
Map or the dashboard when it is
opened. Click the double arrows to
open the panel. When the panel is
open click the icon with the down
arrow. Select map or dashboard.
The panel will now show your
selection.

17
Starting a new Work Order
To start a new work order, click the green ‘New WO’ button.
You will see a confirmation notice in the upper right.

18
A new Work Order is created:
The work order screen will have many fields on it for you to fill out. The fields
that display are customizable in the security section. You can control what fields
you want and in which order.
Screen customization is security
controlled. If you have rights to
customize screens, you will see a
customize wrench in the ellipse (3
dots) fly out. We will cover
customization in another section in detail.
Note: text fields such as Wo Summary with the three little hash marks in the
lower right corner can be dragged to make them bigger using the hash marks as
a handle.

19
Making entries in fields
Fields that have a drop-down arrow
on the right will filter as you type in
the field. This is a new feature that
has been asked for by many users.
Just start typing the id or description
for the field and MaintStar will
display the entries that match what
you are typing. When you see what
you are looking for click on it to
select it.
Deleting entries
If you have an entry in a field but you picked the wrong thing, you can drop down
the box and choose something else. The first value in many fields will be the
word ‘(empty)’. This will blank out the field. In tables like the LEM, there is a
check box to the left of the line. Check this box and the word delete appears at
the top of the table. Click this delete button and the line will be deleted.

20
Searching in a field
If you can’t find what you are looking for with the filter as you type, there is a way
to do a more advanced search. The magnifying glass to the right of the field
opens a floating window that will let you run a search.
Type in the fields and the system will filter the results list automatically. Click on
the result you are looking for from the display list. You can search with a few
letters and MaintStar will instantly display records that match what you have
typed. You can search in more than one field in combination.

21
Adding Assets
The ‘Asset Tab’ is where assets are added to the work order. The work
order starts with the asset “unknown” as a place holder. In most cases,
you want the workorder to identify the asset involved so this work
becomes part of the asset history. When you have identified the asset
you will change the unknown to the correct asset. The magnifying glass
to the right of the Asset ID opens a search window for assets.
You can filter my Id, type and other fields. Click on the correct one and
then OK to add it to the work order.
1. To add additional asset, click the add button. A new line will appear.
2. Select asset type, then the asset ID. All other fields are optional.
3. Click save to save your entry.
4. If you click the enter key, you will add an additional line.
5. If you need to delete an entry, check the check box next to the pencil
on the left. The delete button will appear. Click the delete button to
delete the checked line(s).
6. The pencil on the left will let you edit a line. Click save when you
have finished the edit.

22
New Feature – Tasks
MaintStar version 15 has a great new feature. You can add one or more “tasks”
to each asset in your asset list.
Tasks are specific actions to be documented for each asset. A task could be
very simple such as click on the “Done” checkbox to record that that asset was
taken care of.
Tasks can be more complex, such as asking for a rating to be recorded for the
asset condition, or to update a meter reading. How tasks are set up will be
described in the setup document, but for now just be aware that the new feature
exists.
To add a task just click on one of the asset lines and you will see the task
section open below the asset list.
Tasks can be premade or entered free form.

23
Adding a Free Form Task
Click add free form task.
A new line will be added.
Enter a description. Save.
When the task is complete, edit the task and check the done box. The system
will record the date and ID that it was completed.

24
Adding LEM
Labor, Equipment and Material
The tab “LEM”, is a new term in version 15. It stands for Labor,
Equipment and Material. This section allows you to put all your cost
related data in one screen. We know that you will find this convenient
and efficient.
1.Start a new entry with the add LEM button.
2. Select type of entry.
You can enter:
• Labor – a person
• Equipment – Vehicles or other equipment used
• Material – parts and materials from your inventory
• Miscellaneous costs
• Work Quantity (If you are using Work Planning)
• Crews of people and equipment (Must be created in Setup)
• Parts Kit (Must be created in Inventory)

25
3. After you make the type selection, select code identity for the
person or contractor or crew or part etc.
4. At the Right on each line there are optional fields for Location
code Management Unit and Activity.
NOTE: Management unit (previously called Administrative System)
and Activity are now on each LEM line. This means you can have
MULTIPLE activities in the same work order. Set the mgt unit and
activity on one line of the LEM, and it will repeat on lines you enter
after that. This is a real time saver.
If your workgroup is using the standard work order layout, then each
asset has its own LEM group. This is the way the Regular work order
was arranged in version 14. The infrastructure work order layout has
one LEM section for the entire work order. This is the way the
infrastructure work orders were arranged in version 14.

26
The Asset History Tab
The asset history tab will list the assets in this work order.
If you click on the asset type field for one asset, you will see the list of
work orders that have that asset appear below the asset list.
If you click on the asset ID (This is Blue and is a link) you will open up
the asset setup screen for this asset.

27
Job Site
The Job site tab is where you can record a physical address for the
work. This is optional as some types of work can be referenced by the
location code on the header tab. If you are however working at a
physical street address you can store it here.
The address line will pull in addresses from the address table from the
setup. It will filter entries as you type.

28
Request
If the work order originated from a request made with the MaintStar
Work Request, the information from the request will be stored here.
If the work order did not originate from a request, you are free to record
information about the main contact or informal request here.

29
Related
The related tab allows you to link in other work orders that have some
relationship to this work order. All the linked work orders will show the
related work orders on this tab.
To make a linkage, click the add button and then select the related
work order.
You can click the blue work order numbers to jump to each work order.

30
Notifications
The notification tab allows you to add several different types of
notifications to the work order for different individuals. Notifications can
be email notices or SMS text messages. These notifications would be
over and above other notifications that are set up for normal processing

31
Plan
This tab Holds several different elements.
• You can record a percentage of completion
• Record reasons the work order was not completed
• Record reason for downtime
• The bottom section lets you record “Planned” dates and costs in
order to compare to the “Actual” dates and costs.

32
Log
The log is a list of all inserts, deletions and updates made to the Work
Order. These events are recorded by date and record what user made
them.

33
Attachments
The Attachment tab lets you attach pictures, PDF and other types of
files to the workorder.
To add an attachment, click the add button.
In the pop-up window, click choose file and navigate to the file you
want to attach. You can attach any type of file. MaintStar will use
your windows file association for the program to open different file
types. You can have any number of attachments
The thumbnail box selects the image for display on the details tab.
Here you see the file attached:

34
When you click on the attachment in any part of the line other than the
name link, it will display on the screen. If you click on the name link the
file will open in another window.

35
Issues and Actions
The ‘Issues and Actions’ section is used to record specific issues that
need service or maintenance, and the action steps used to complete or
resolve the issue. This section is optional. It would be used if you want
a very detailed record of issues and solutions. Many of our users will
find the Task function previously described will be enough detail.

36
PM Scheduling
PM (Preventative Maintenance) scheduling in version 15 adds many new
features and options. In version 14 and earlier, MaintStar had two separate
ways to schedule PMs.
1. MaintStar Had a Calendar based Pm that used a ‘Master Schedule” to
hold future pm work orders. This method was typically used by Facilities
and Plant operations.
2. Meter based work orders and Infrastructure groups used a different
method that calculates PMs on the fly and did not have a master schedule.
Both processes had their own advantages and limitations. Neither process was
a perfect solution.
In Version 15, the Pm scheduling process has been completely redesigned from
the ground up to be more flexible and offer more options than ever.
The new system is unified. You do not have different setup process and different
groups of PMs to issue that you had in version 14. In fact, you can set the
system to automatically issue the PMs automatically.
NOTE: PMs that are imported from version 14 will all fit in the version 15
structure.
The PM setup is in the Work Order menu
section.

37
Templates
Pm creation begins with “templates” The Template is used to build Pm
Schedules. Templates hold the task, frequency Scheduling rules and other
information about a pm service. A template combined with assets are the raw
materials needed to create a pm schedule.
Here is a Template Screen:
1. Search and Filter -opens and closes with the word ‘List”. Works the same
as on the work order screen. This is used for finding templates that you
have already made.
2. Main Tabs of the Template sections
a. Details - is the main template screen
b. LEM - section allows you to add labor, equipment and materials to
the template, where they will be added to the workorders that result
from the use of this template.
c. Tasks – Tasks can be added to the template here. Note: Tasks are a
new function and adding multiple tasks may be a better than making
a list of tasks in WO description text box.
d. Frequency – This key part of the template is where frequency is set
up. Frequencies can be Calendar or Meter based or both.
e. Rules - This section controls how and when the Pm will be issued.
f. Schedules - This important section controls the generation of the
PMs, shows forecast and sets notification rules.

38
g. Attachments – Link in Pictures and Documents that will carry to the
PM work order.
h. Cycles – Tracking of pm schedule issuance.
3. Tab expansion – Uses to hide or show some of the tabs on the screen.
4. Buttons –
a. Create a new template
b. Save changes to this template
c. Print a hard copy of the template
d. Under 3 dots
i. Duplicate the template
ii. Delete the template
5. Template Fields – on the Details Tab. These fields will become the work
order issued from this template.

39
Create a new template
In the Template menu, under
Work Order click ‘New Template”
A pop-up will appear. Type in a
name for the template, and a
description. You will see the
name of the work group you are
currently in as a reminder.
Click Create to save. The system will pop up a confirmation.
Fill in the various fields as you want the work order to have by default. These
values will be prepopulated. If you leave a field blank, you can fill it in on the
work order itself after it is issued.
You can create the instructions for the service two different ways. You can type
in a list of steps to be performed in the large ‘WO Description’ box. This is how
MaintStar version 14 was configured. New in version 15, you can create the
task list with the task function. There is a check box below the ‘WO Description’
to activate this process. We will use this method in this example to show how it
functions. Click Save.

40
Setting Frequency
The frequency tab is where you set the rate of occurrence for the PM. This is
referred to as when the Pm will be “Due”
Calendar
The Calendar section sets occurrence of the pm on a frequency of days, weeks
months and years. Type in the number and select the unit such as 3 – month, 1 –
year. When you do this the ON Field will become active. The “ON” field lets you
set a specific day, or first Monday or last Friday etc. for Month unit. For weeks,
you can select which day of the week. Days and years do not have an ‘On”
choice. They will be calculated based on your start date, which is set later in this
example. The calendar is the primary scheduling frequency for most PMs. We
suggest you use it in all cases. It is reliable and repeatable.
Meter
If you have equipment that is metered such as vehicles, production equipment
etc., you can include a meter in the PM frequency. You must first have the
intended vehicle or equipment set up with a meter, and you must have a
process in place for the meter reading to be taken and recorded regularly. You
may have the asset meter updated automatically if you have the system linked
to a vehicle fueling system which records updated meter values at fueling, or a
Scada system for production equipment which captures meter values.
If your intended assets for this template have a meter you can set the meter
frequency here. Select the meter type from the drop down. Meter types are set
up in the setup module Setup>tables>meter type.
Event
Reserved for future development.

41
Rules Tab
The frequency tab sets the basics for frequency interval of the PM. The rules
tab allows you to make sophisticated modifications to the frequency schedule.
The Fixed / Floating Radio buttons control how the pms from this template will
issue.
Fixed – PMs will remain fixed on their original schedule pattern. From issue date
to issue date. For example, If you start a PM for the first Monday of every month,
on a fixed schedule, It will be due the first Monday of every month consistently.
We recommend you use the fixed schedule in most cases/
The Floating schedule - This calculates the next due from the last CLOSED date
of the service to the next issue date. This means if you opened a monthly
service on the first and closed it on the 20th of the month, the next service would
calculate the month frequency from the Closed date of the 20th to the next issue
date of the 20th of the next month. This would be useful for services that are not
critical. The system will calculate based on your ability to close out the PMS.
This means that you may not accomplish 12 monthly services over the course of
a year.

42
Below the fixed and floating radio buttons are two dropdowns that will
reschedule PMs which would happen to fall on a Saturday or Sunday. You can
‘Pull’ the pm back, up to a week or ‘push’ them ahead.
The Section Labeled “Don’t create this PM between” Lets you set a date range
in which no PMs will be generated.
The checkbox at the bottom of the screen is very important to understand.
When the check box is unchecked, the system will wait for one PM service to be
completed before the next one will be generated.
If you check the box, the next service will be generated according to the
schedule even if the current PM is still Open.
Note: If you only want one open pm for a service to be open at a TIME, LEAVE
THE BOX UNCHECKED.
On the right, the create work order checkbox should be checked. The Alerts are
for future development.

43
The Template LEM Tab
On the LEM Tab it is possible to add Labor, Equipment and materials to the
template. These entries will be brought to the work order automatically when
the work order is issued.
You add entries here in the same way they are added to a work order.
Add New - creates a single-entry line.
Add crew – allows pre-made crews to be added as a group.
Add Kit – allows pre-made groups of inventory materials.

44
Tasks Tab
The tasks tab allows you to add tasks to the work order. The ‘add task button
lets you select a task that has been created and saved from the setup section
Tables>Task Id.
The ‘add row’ allows you to add a task on the fly.
Tasks will allow the user to mark a checkbox when the task is done. The
system will stamp the completed time and date automatically.
New in version 15, you can create the Work Order description from the
template, with the task function. There is a check box below the ‘WO
Description’ to activate this process. We will use this method in this example to
show how it functions.

45
Adding Tasks
On the task tab, you can add free entry tasks (created on the fly) with the “add
Row”
The “Add Task” will let you select from a list of pre-built tasks.
Note the “Nesting” will be marked as N1 automatically. Nesting will be
described separately in this document. N1 (meaning Nesting group1)
designates a Pm that has one service cycle that repeats.
“Add Checklist” allows you to add in lists of several tasks saved together in a
list. The checklists are created and saved in the Work Order menu section
“Checklist”
The ‘Required’ check box, means that this task must be marked “done” for the
work order to be closed.

46
Nesting
The Concept of Nesting is very simple.
Example 1
For some assets you have only one PM service, let’s say you do this once a
month. Every month you do the same service over and over. That is a single
repeated service.
Example 2
For other assets they require different levels of service. Let’s say you do tasks
one and two every month. Then every 6 months you do something more, task
one, two and three. Then once a year you do something more, task one, two
three and four.
Example 2 would have a different PM template for each of the three levels of
service, the monthly, the 6 months and the yearly. If this was built with 3
templates, each would produce PMs at their given frequency. When the
monthly and 6 months PMS would be due on the same month, you would have
2 PMs. Likewise, when the yearly, 6 month and monthly fall due together you
would have 3 Pm work orders created in one month.
Can you see the problem here? You don’t typically want multiple PM work
orders for the same assets at the same time.
Nesting is a way to solve this problem by giving you only ONE PM service per
period. The shortest frequency determines service period so this example
nested would look like this:
Service period Pm service
1 monthly
2 monthly
3 monthly
4 monthly
5 monthly
6 6 month
7 monthly
8 monthly
9 monthly
10 monthly
11 monthly
12 yearly

47
MaintStar version 15 there are two different ways to
accomplish this with nested services.
The first way is to have separate templates for the monthly, 6 month and yearly
services. Each written with different instructions. MaintStar will switch out the
templates according to the service period. This is the way MaintStar version 14
and earlier worked. If you had templates set up this way, MaintStar 15 will be
able to import them and the services will continue just as you had before.
The new way in version 15 is to have only one template but use the new feature
of tasks. You can trigger which tasks should be shown on different nested
schedule frequencies. Both methods accomplish the same result.
We suggest, if you are an existing customer with imported templates from
previous versions you can continue using those as they are. When you
however, add in new PMs, try using tasks for the different nested frequencies.
Ultimately, we feel this is a more flexible approach.
Nesting based on using different templates.
(Version 14 style)
Here you see a monthly template with nesting configured to switch in a 6-month
template when the monthly occurs 6 times (6 months), and to switch to template
named Hydrant yearly when the base monthly occurs 12 times (once a year).
This is the way MaintStar version 14 and earlier handled nesting.

48
Nesting using tasks instead of switching templates
(Version 15 Style)
This new method uses ONE TEMPLATE.
• You link in tasks for each service instruction to the template
• You set up the frequencies for the services I n the nesting tab
• You go back to the task tab to set the tasks to trigger by frequency.
Step 1.
You must first set up frequencies in the Nesting tab, (The same way as
described for the other method). However, you DO NOT link in separate temples
for each frequency.

49
Step 2.
Once you have the frequencies set up in the nesting section, go back to the task
tab.
You are now ready to add in tasks. It is best to put them in a logical order. Put
the tasks that are in the shortest frequency at the top and work your way down
to the next NEW tasks and so on. You only need to put the tasks in once.
When you have the tasks entered, select the nesting drop down on the right for
each. All the tasks that are for the shortest frequency will be set to n1. Then the
tasks that add to the n1 tasks for the next higher frequency should be set for N2.
The next higher frequency tasks should be set for N3 and so forth.
This method is cumulative, N1 is your base set of tasks. These appear on every
frequency cycle. The N2 tasks add to the n1 and so forth.
As the PMs are issued the system will now add these tasks to the Pm according
to this schedule.

50
Asset types
The “Asset types” tab is optional. It allows you to select one or more asset types
to be associated to this template. This will control what types of assets can be
used with this template. If there are asset types setup here, then on the
“Scheduling” tab you will only see these asset types as choices.

51
Scheduling
The Scheduling Tab is where you build the PM. While on the template, open
the scheduling tab.
The top section of the screen is where you link assets to the template. You will
also add in the last due date for each asset or group of assets. This is
necessary. The ‘Last due date’ will allow the system to calculate when the
service is due again.
Last due date + frequency= next due date
To select the asset line, click on the schedule number. The line will turn blue to
show it is selected. If you click on the asset id you will leave this screen and go
to the detail screen for the asset. When you select an asset in this manner,
showing the line blue highlighted, the details appear in a schedule box below.
Step 1.
Add an asset to the template using the ‘Add Asset” button. In this example we
are working with HVAC units. Select an HVAC and save. If you want to have
several assets on the same Pm work order, select “Add Group” The group pop
up will give you a choice of selecting a pre-made group of assets or selecting
several assets together on the fly.
Note: The template can be used to make many PMs with different assets. When
you add multiple lines of assets, each line will create a pm.
• If the asset line has only one asset, it will be a single asset pm.
• If the line has a group of assets in it the pm will be created with all the
assets in the group on the same PM.

52
PM Work Order Issue
The Menu Item PM WO Issue has 3 tabs:
1. Create WO from Pm – Here you can preview PMs due now or coming due
in the future. You can select the preview with many criteria. You can
select the previewed PMs with a checkbox and issue them.
2. Batch Issue Setup – This screen allows you to set up conditions for PMs to
be automatically generated. You can manually issue a batch as well.
3. PM Log – List of PMs issued by the system.
The ‘Create WO from PM’ Screen
The fields at the top of the screen allow you to select workgroup and other
parameters. The fields on the right allow you to select what will be COMING
due in the future by date or other parameters. The Preview button will display
PMs that are due or coming due based on your selections. When you have
made your selection click ‘RUN’ to see your results.
If you want to issue one or some of the PMs, click the checkbox that is to the left
of the line, then click the “Create WO from the selected Rows” button and the
work orders will be created.

53
Batch Issue Setup
This section allows you to set up timers that will issue your Pm work
orders automatically for you. This new feature in version 15 is designed to
make your life easier.
To set up a Batch schedule:
• Select the work group
• Set time periods to run:
o Weekly or Monthly
o Which days to run
o What time to run
o Emails of people to be sent a report of each run
o Optional fields in the upper right allow you to select PMs not
due now but coming due.
• Save the schedule and the system will automatically issue PMs
based on these settings.
• NOTE the schedule will be executed on the SERVER time shown
the screen. Please make your settings accordingly.
• Run Now will execute this batch manually.

54
PM Log
The PM Log allows you to view a report of Pms that have been issued. You can
select a date range and one or several different workgroups. Select run to
generate the report on screen. Print will download a copy to print.

55
PM Reports
The PM Report section:
• Due Service – What Pms are due now?
• Work Order Review – Work orders made from Pm schedules and their
status.
• Template Review – Shows what templates have been created for each
workgroup
• Overdue PM Wo Report -Pm Work Orders Open for 1 to 30 days, 31 to 60
days, 61 to 90 days and over 91 days.
• PM Due Soon Report – Pms coming due in the future
• Projected Cost – Projected costs of PMs.

56

57
MAINTSTAR 15
QUICK SETUP
GUIDE
Quick explanations on getting
started with MaintStar 15, Setup and
Security.
MaintStar
28 Hammond Phone: 800-255-5675
Irvine California 92618 Email: WWW://Maintstar.com

58
MaintStar Security & Setup
Security and Setup will be the main modules to get started with MaintStar
Application.
Security
offers different level of application configurations, ranging from adding or editing
users, configuring rights to directly manipulating data.

59
Security > Users
allows adding, deleting, editing and rights setting for all users in the system.
Users have 4 settings per system user: User Details, User Rights, Security
Groups, Effective Rights.
SECURITY > USERS > USER DETAILS:
You can setup basic user details. Primary rate can be first established here as
well as default workgroup notification settings for the user.
Adding a new user will also insert a record inside the Setup Customer table.
This is so the system user can use Portal later.
A user, upon added, is defaulted to be active, but not assigned a role (Driver or
Technician). Without a role, the user cannot be used as labor elsewhere in the
system.

60
Adding New User
- Adding a new user usually require a username, userid, and a primary
workgroup.
- Password is optional because a system user can be made solely as a
labor option and not directly using the system.
- In order to be selected as a labor option, the “Technician” checkbox must
be checked (can be later changed to “Driver” check instead).
- Without a workgroup, user cannot use the system in any meaningful way.
- The extra workgroups are for inclusion purposes.

61
Security > Users > User Rights:
You can set individual rights to a user. This will grant user the right to access
either a specific screen or a specific module in the system.
Rights can be automatically given through the inclusion of a Security Groups or
a specific right.
Rights are supplied by MaintStar Application and cannot be added, deleted or
renamed. Description can still be edited.
Special rights:
With these 2 rights, you can enable the ability to login via Admin privilege as
another user in the system. This is NOT the same as login in directly as the
user.
Without these, you (as admin) cannot login as the user via Admin privilege.

62
Security > Users > Security Groups:
Security Groups is the best and fastest way to supply rights to a user without the
hassle of manually picking and giving individual rights.
Adding a user into a Security Group will let the user inherit all the preset rights
given to the group.
More Security Groups can be created via Groups Setup.

63
Security > Users > Effective Rights:
This list shows what rights are given and are effective on the selected user.

64
Security > Groups Setup
creates new security group with preset rights. Users who are included in a
security group will inherit the rights the group provides. There are 2 settings:
Group Users and Group Rights.
Security > Groups Setup > Group Users:
Group Users shows a list of users who are currently selected into the group.
These users inherit the set of rights the group has in Group Rights.
You can add or delete users in a group.

65
Security > Groups Setup > Group Rights:
You can edit the rights for a group. Rights range from N (None), Y (Yes) to
AEDV (Add, Edit, Delete, View).
Rights are supplied by MaintStar Application and cannot be added, deleted or
renamed.

66
Security > Screen Customization:
allows customizing the label, position and requirement of a screen.
Some screen customizations are done at a workgroup level, some are done at a
different level.

67
Security > System Settings:
- You can edit settings for the amount of time of fail login or other general validation
across the system.
You can edit information for Master ID. All information and ruling regarding the
session and information of an Administrator can be done here.

68
Security > DB Config:
You can check your server information here.
Information is editable but be careful since they can negatively affect the entire
application if done without proper knowledge.

69
Security > Global Data Changes:
You can perform direct manipulation of data across the entire system. All data
changes are performed based on a Value Type, meaning all values of the same
Value Type will be changed to a new given value.
You can either immediately execute a Global Data Change or add a record and
execute later.
Force Run check allows you to run a data change that can potentially cause
negative impact on the data. In most cases, this is just an extra confirmation.

70
Security > License:
You can view what Modules and the amount of Workgroups you can have and
control.

71
Security > Utilities:
You can execute these functions sequentially to update your database structure
to include MaintStar’s newest settings and configurations.

72
Setup
offers a variety of system settings that can be later used in other modules for
easy data access in conjunction with manual data entry.

73
Setup > Tables:
Setup Tables offers a huge range of tables which will be used to hold preset
values for later usage.
Values can be added, edited or deleted at will.
These values will show up when performing data entry in other places
(pending).

74
Setup > Labor:
Labor screen, although very similar to Security > Users, is at a higher level of
security and doesn’t deal with setting up security.
Here, you can setup different Trade Rates for a labor with Multiple Trades
Rates.
You can give a labor an attachment for things like personalized profile image or
the asset the labor owns (a picture of a car for a driver).

75
Setup > Customer:
Setup Customer allows adding, editing and deleting customers in the system.
Customers are also potential Portal user; be aware when editing customers.

76
Setup > Vendor:
You can add, edit and delete vendors here.
Setup > Notification Templates:
These are the templates for notification.
Templates can be categorized by type.

77
Setup > Workgroup:
Workgroup setup is one of the most crucial setups for the system.
Depending on the workgroup, some assets, users, conditions and some filters
can come prefiltered. You can change the settings by adding or reducing filters,
add specific items to be usable in different workgroup here.
Furthermore, you can select which work order printout to use for the workgroup,
what closing condition you want the work order of the workgroup to have, or
adjust any other notification setting specific to the workgroup and its users.
The number of workgroups you can create depends on the system license.
Check Security > License for more information.

78
Setup > Workgroup > Work Order Control:
You can control the layout of a work order here.
A work order can have 3 basic layouts: Standard, Fleet, and Default. Standard
and Fleet are similar in controls, but different printout might be required. Default
layout has different control from Standard and Fleet as well as a different
printout needed, so please be careful when choosing a layout for the workgroup.
A new workgroup, upon adding, is defaulted to be active.
You can only delete an inactive workgroup. You can only make a workgroup
inactive after going through several security checks.

79
Setup > Workgroup > Closing Condition:
You can control the requirements for closing a work order in the workgroup.
A work order cannot be closed if any of the checked requirements is not fulfilled.

80
Setup > Workgroup > Auto-Fill:
You can setup fields in a work order to be automatically filled upon creation.

81
Setup > Workgroup > Notification by User:
You can select any template for notification regarding work order here.
You can setup specific people to receive notification across the system
regarding the activities in the workgroup you’re configuring. These users will
always get notification despite their position or involvement in a work order’s
activities.

82
SETUP > WORKGROUP > NOTIFICATION BY ROLE:
You can setup role notification here.
The difference between role notification and user notification by workgroup is
that the users in user notification will always get notified, while role notification
only notify the users of respective role (Technician, Assign To, Supervisor, Crew
Leader, Linked User or Customer).

83
SETUP > WORKGROUP > USERS:
You can add users across the system into the filtering list of users for the
configured workgroup.
This allows users who do not belong to the workgroup to show up as selectable
users in the workgroup.
There are 3 roles in which you can have the users show up as: standard user or
labor (Users), inspector role (Inspectors) or admin role (Administrators).

84
SETUP > WORKGROUP > FILTERS:
You can check for a workgroup to either Show All or Filter the selected Filters.
Show All will not filter any option. Whenever you select from a dropdown, if
“Show All,” you’ll be able to see everything the system has to offer, even if your
work group or work order doesn’t deal with the presented options.

85
SETUP > WORKGROUP > FILTER SELECTIONS:
You can expand the amount of options a filtered workgroup has by adding more
items into the “Assigned” group.
Normally, some assets or options are specifically designed for a workgroup (i.e.
Hydrant for Water workgroup). You can add Hydrant to Facility workgroup and
have the workgroup filtered (check Setup > Workgroup > Filters); you can then
view Facility workgroup with only the assets and option designed for that
workgroup PLUS a newly accessible asset Hydrant.

86
Setup > Address:
Address allows you to setup preset addresses so the system can reference
later.
Setting up an address also utilizes the preset address details from the Setup
Tables, minimizing manual inputs.

87
Setup > GIS:
GIS allows you to edit and configure different map layers.
You can also setup your own Feature Services here.

88
Setup > KPI Dashboard:
- KPI Dashboard allows you to control the setting of Elastic Kibana
Dashboard.
- There are 2 dashboards in MaintStar15: User Dashboard, and KPI
Dashboard.
- User Dashboard is given to all MaintStar15 installment, but KPI
Dashboard is separated
- KPI Dashboard is only usable if you have an Elastic URL link.
- You can set default Elastic User and Elastic Password so the application
can login and ready KPI Dashboard upon signing in.
- You can setup which user(s) in the system who can have access to this
KPI Dashboard by adding to the list “Users who have integrated
dashboard.”

89
- “Views” refers to the different views you have access to in which you’ll
sync to the dashboard and allow data fetched from the view to show on
graphs and reports.
- The dashboards can be accessed via Home.

90
Setup > Jobs:
You can view batch processes you’ve ran here.
Jobs (or batch processes) have 3 statuses: Pending, Error, or Done.
These batch processes can remain here for some time to show you the result of
what you’ve run.

91
Setup > Data Dictionary:
Data Dictionary allows you to view the entire setup of the profile’s database.
You can see table names, column names, data types of the columns and other
details.
You cannot add or delete any table or column.
You can edit detail information such as description (Comments) or some
labeling.

92
Setup > RT Monitor:
You can check on and monitor (in real time) the location of users within the workgroup.
Special Usage: KPI Dashboard:
- The KPI Dashboard is an integrated Elastic dashboard. All the functionalities and UI
are that of Kibana’s.
- For more in-depth instructions and manuals, please refer to
https://www.elastic.co/guide/en/kibana/current/index.html .
- For general usages, there are 4 main menus a user should get used to:

93
= The Dashboard:
- The Dashboard contains all the different dashboards that have been setup for the
system.
- A dashboard, by definition, is a container of more than 1 Visualization.
- This is a sample of a dashboard.
- Each of the graph and bar is a Visualization.
- A creation of a Visualization ranges from being simple to rather complicated with
percentile calculation. Again, please refer to
https://www.elastic.co/guide/en/kibana/current/index.html for better documentation of
this.
= The Visualization:
- A Visualization is a single chart/graph/bar/gauge that shows a calculated statistic of a
single or 2 indexes (indexes are basically views which fetch data from the database).

94
- This is a sample Visualization and its criteria.
- All Visualization requires a unit of time for its measurement. The view you select for the
Visualization should contain at least 1 time-related field or column.
= The Discovery:
- A Discovery is basically a grid that shows data in a table structure, with columns and
rows.

95
Due to the complexity of creating a visualization and how many variations there can be, it’s
best to consult the Elastic Documentation for more information:
https://www.elastic.co/guide/en/kibana/6.8/createvis.html

96
Notifications
MaintStar can send messages to its users under a variety of circumstances. For
Work Order, this includes:
When a WO is created
•
When a WO is saved with a new value in "Assigned To", or "Work in
•
Progress"
When a WO is closed
•
When a part is received
•
When a task is complete
•
When a particular asset is added to a WO
•
We also have notifications for Work Requests. This includes being able to send
notifications to the requester if they aren't anonymous.
Notification Types
Notifications can be sent in three different ways: Internal Notifications, Email,
and Text (SMS).
Internal notifications are accessed in Home -> Notifications. This is a simple
solution if you prefer to check your messages in the MaintStar application, or
keep a record of them.
Email notifications require that the user has a valid email address on record.
The user can access their own email in Home -> My Preferences, or an
administrator can access it via Security -> Users.

97
Text (SMS) notifications require that the user has a valid Cell Phone on record.
The user can access their own cell number in Home -> My Preferences, or an
administrator can access it via Security -> Users.
Note that a country code is needed for texting to work (1 for USA). This can be
accomplished in two ways:
1. The user manually includes their country code in their phone number (ex:
1-555-555-5555)
2. The administrator can have the system automatically prepend a Phone
Country Code. This can be configured in Security -> System Settings.
If you want to ensure a number doesn't get a country code prepended, you can
put a plus sign (+) as the first character in the number. For example you might
want this if you have a foreign user who doesn't use your default country code.
ex: +64-555-555-5555
User Preferences
User notification preferences determine which notifications will be received:
Notify by Text
•
Show Notifications in Notifications list (aka Internal Notifications)
•
Notify by Regular Email
•
These options can be accessed by the user themselves in Home -> My
Preferences, or by an administrator in Security -> Users. A user can receive any
combination of internal notifications, email, or texts depending on these settings.
If the administrator prefers the user to not have control over notification
preferences, they can check May Edit Notifications Setup in Security -> Users.

98
WO Notification Setup
To configure notifications for work orders, you will find two tabs in Security ->
Workgroups: Notification by User and Notification by Role. Notification by
User is very straightforward: Add a user to the table, and checkmark the types of
notifications you would like them to receive. The user will receive a notification
every time this action occurs in their workgroup. It is intended mainly for
supervisors and other high-level users who need to be aware of everything
happening.
Notification by Role is much more practical for the average user. When
configured correctly, they will only receive notifications for things directly
relevant to them. You will see a grid of checkboxes, which will determine who
receives notifications and under which circumstances. For example, you can set
it up so that only "Assigned To" receives a message when "Assigned To" is
changed, but "Supervisor" will receive a message when the WO is created or
when the WO is closed. And so on.
Both tabs also have dropdowns where you can choose Templates. Templates
determine what the message says when it's generated. MaintStar comes with
default templates, but you can also create your own. More details in the
Templates section.

99
WR Notification Setup
Notifications for Work requests work slightly differently. When a WO is created
from a WR, this will trigger the same way as any other WO notification. But for
other WR-specific events, notifications can be configured in Work Request ->
WR Settings. Two tabs are relevant here: Notif. Templates and Operations.
Operations is the tab for setting up Operations and Issues to categorize work
requests (see documentation on WR Issues and Operations). On this screen,
you can assign an internal user (i.e. not a member of the public) for notifications
on a specific Issue or Operation. To do this, simply edit an issue or operation
and add or remove users to that row as needed.
What are these users being notified for exactly? This is where the Notif.
Templates tab becomes relevant. On the Notif. Templates tab, the Notifications
for Internal Users section determines which notifications those users receive
and when they receive them:
Notify when Operation selected will trigger when an internal user is
•
assigned to a particular Operation and a WR is created for that Operation.
Notify when Issue selected will trigger when an internal user is assigned
•
to a particular Issue and a WR is created for that Issue.
Notify when WR is assigned is sent to the assigned user when a WR is
•
created with an assignee or is edited to have an assignee.
Notify supervisor when WR is assigned is sent to the user in the
•
Supervisor field when a WR is created with an assignee or is edited to
have an assignee.
Notify when WR is closed is sent to Operation users when a work request
•
is closed.

100
Notifications to Requester by Group - These notification options can be
customized based on individual groups. Configure one group in particular by
selecting it on the dropdown. Notifying a requester means notifying the user in
the Customer ID field.
All of these options have a corresponding Template dropdown for choosing a
notification template (see Templates section). The notifications will not function
unless a template exists for that notification.

101
Notification Templates
Templates determine what a message will say when it's sent. While MaintStar
comes with default templates, you can also create your own to better suit your
needs.
You can view, edit, and create templates in Security -> Notification Templates.
To create a new Template, click "Add" on top of the list of existing templates.
Take careful note of the Template Type - this will determine where in the system
you will be able to choose the template.
Templates can contain special variables, which will be replaced based on the
specific work order or work request. For example:
Work order $WONO has been assigned to $ASSIGNTO
might become: Work order W000000001 has been assigned to JohnDoe
A full list of available fields can be found on the right-hand side, along with descriptions. These fields are
different depending on the Template Type. These fields will work in both the Subject line and the Body lines.
Sms and MaintStar
You will notice there are two text boxes for the body of the message: Email Text and

102
MAINTSTAR 15
INVENTORY GUIDE
Quick explanations on MaintStar 15
Inventory Module.
MaintStar
28 Hammond Phone: 800-255-5675
Irvine California 92618 Email: WWW://Maintstar.com

103
MaintStar Inventory
Inventory shows different kinds of materials the system will be using.
Inventory Items, called Materials (or Parts at times), can either be
“controlled” or “open.”
Inventory Concepts:
Before creating new inventory items, there are several concepts and
setups which must be addressed.
All inventory items need at least 3 key values: stock number, warehouse
and bin number.
- Stock number is the identification for an inventory item. All stock
numbers must be unique.
- All inventory items must come from a warehouse.
- All inventory items must also have a bin number. Bin number indicates the “bin” in the warehouse that
an item’s in.
::Set up your warehouse:
- Visit Setup > Tables and select “Warehouse” to create your warehouse.
- A warehouse can be “controlled” or “non-control.” A controlled warehouse enables the concept of
“controlled inventory.”
- Check or uncheck the “Controlled” checkbox to set the ware house to be “controlled” or “non-control.”
::Controlled Inventory (concept, practice):
- When visiting Inventory > Inventory Summary > Header, you’ll most likely meet this red description on
several inventory items, CONTROLLED INVENTORY.

104
- Normally, MaintStar Application will automatically create an Issue Transaction to distribute the materials
to a Work Order and update the quantity for registered inventory items. Upon closing a Work Order,
MaintStar will perform such transaction in the background.
- With CONTROLLED INVENTORY, MaintStar Application will NOT automatically perform such task. It is
up to the system user to handle the transactions themselves manually. Work Order cannot be closed if it
includes a controlled inventory item.
(Adding “setup” and “non-setup” inventory item into Work Order as LEM)
::“Setup” vs. “Non-Setup” Inventory:
- “Setup” Inventory items are inventory items (materials) which are registered into MaintStar Application.
Any inventory items you can see in the Inventory > Inventory Summary are all considered “Setup”
Inventory items.
- “Non-Setup” Inventory items are inventory items (materials) which are NOT registered in MaintStar. In
most cases, these inventory items are added via free-form inputs. When adding a material into a Work
Order’s LEM, by unchecking the checkbox next to the type, you’re enabled to enter any name (Code/ID)
and other information for the item. This item won’t be register into MaintStar.
- ONLY at the Work Order LEM level you’re allowed to add “non-setup” inventory item. Again, they won’t
be tracked or registered into MaintStar Application.
::” Tracked” vs. “Non-Tracked” Inventory:
- The check “Inv Type” for a “Setup” Inventory item indicates if it’s “tracked” (checked) or “non-tracked”
(unchecked).
- A “tracked” inventory item will need to be included in a transaction to update its quantity.
- A “non-tracked” inventory item doesn’t need to be included in a transaction to update its quantity. In fact,
neither issuing nor receiving transaction allows you to select a “non-tracked” inventory item. See more in
Inventory > Receiving Transaction and Inventory > Issuing Transaction.
::” Open” Inventory (concept, state of inventory):
- When a “Setup” Inventory item is added into a Work Order’s LEM, if an Issuing Transaction is not made
and the Work Order is in “Open” status, we call the inventory item an “open” inventory.
- This concept supports the 3 quantity values an inventory item must deal with: Total, Reserved and
Available.
(Taken in Issuing Transaction)
- Total Quantity indicates the total quantity the system currently tracks and in stock. This is the live
amount presents in the warehouse.
- Reserved indicates the quantity that’s being reserved by Work Orders but are not yet supplied.

105
- Available indicates the remaining quantity of the item IF a transaction is to be posted (Total – Reserved =
Available). This is only a prediction that reflects supposed quantity after a Work Order is supplied with
the needed Reserved amount.
- For as long as you have not created and posted an issue transaction OR closed a Work Order, the
actual quantity (total) of the inventory item(s) the Work Order asks for is UNTOUCHED. This is the
timeframe when we consider an inventory item an “open” inventory.
Inventory > Inventory Summary
Inventory Summary will be the screen which allows adding, editing and deleting any material in the system.
Inventory > Inventory Summary > Header
You can edit information regarding a material. You can also add new materials using the button “+ NEW INV.
ITEM.”
The materials you can see or search for is restricted to the available materials in your current workgroup.
All materials, upon added, will be defaulted to Active.
:: Adding a new Material:

106
- “Stock” indicates the name of the material.
- “Warehouse” and “Bin No” are the location of the material.
- By checking “Inventory Item” check, you ensure that the material is selectable through lookup or
dropdown as part of the controlled warehouse when adding to a work order’s LEM. Without this check,
you must manually update the availability of the material as well as inputting its name into a work order’s
LEM.
- By checking “Inventory Item” check, you also ensure the material can be chosen in transactions and has
its availability be updated automatically by the system. Controlled materials cannot change quantity
without a transaction.
- Inventory items added through this module will be considered registered with MaintStar Application,
called “setup” inventory item. All “setup” inventory items are defaulted to be used by Work Order. To
learn how to add a “non-setup” inventory item into a Work Order, visit Inventory Concepts, section
“::“Setup” vs. “Non-Setup” Inventory.”
:: Extra options:
- By clicking the “…” button next to “PRINT”, you have the options to either duplicate or delete the current
material.
- “Customize” is there as a quick access to customize the look of the screen.

107
Inventory > Inventory Summary > Vendor:
You can select and add whichever vendor who supplies the material.
Edits to the information regarding the vendor(s) come from Setup > Vendor module.
Inventory > Inventory Summary > Assets:
You can add asset(s) in which the material will be automatically used for.
Inventory > Inventory Summary > Overviews:
You can view the overall details of the material, where it belongs (which warehouse) and its quantity.
Inventory > Inventory Summary > Issued
You can view the list of issued transaction done on the material.
To make a transaction, visit Inventory > Issue Transaction.

108
Inventory > Inventory Summary > Received:
You can view the list of receiving transaction done on the material.
To make a transaction, visit Inventory > Receiving Transaction.
Inventory > Inventory Summary > Attachments:
You can add different attachments to the material.
Each attachment can be checked with “Print” to print with a work order printout.

109
Inventory > Inventory Summary > Logs:
You can see some of the most recent edits that have been done on the material.
If any issue were to come up, you can always refer to Log and see what has been done before and troubleshoot
accordingly.
Inventory > Receiving Transaction:
A transaction entry can have multiple transaction records.
You can create transaction record(s) when receiving a material from a purchase order.
For a transaction entry to take effect, you must “Post Transaction.”
You can keep editing a transaction record or adding more records until satisfied. “Save” will save the edits but
will not “Post” a transaction. With this, you can later come back to a transaction and resume editing without the
need of adding more and more entries.
:: Adding a transaction record:

110
- A transaction record for material (part) can be manually added, added from a kit set, or added from a
certain Purchase Order.
- If adding from a Purchase Order, all the materials in that Purchase Order will be added as records.
Inventory > Issuing Transaction:
Like receiving transactions, an issuing transaction entry can have multiple transaction records.
You can create transaction record(s) when issuing a material to a work order. A work order will NOT be able to
close if you not have enough material to issue a transaction.
For a transaction entry to take effect, you must “Post Transaction.”
You can keep editing a transaction record or adding more records until satisfied. “Save” will save the edits but
will not “Post” a transaction. With this, you can later come back to a transaction and resume editing without the
need of adding more and more entries.
:: Adding a transaction record:
- A transaction record for material (part) can be manually added, added from a kit set, or added from a
certain Work Order.
- If adding from a Work Order, all the materials in that Work Order will be added as records.

111
Inventory > Mass Deletion:
You can delete multiple transaction in one sitting.
You can filter selections by date or specific number before deleting.

112
Inventory > Part Kit:
You can create any part kit as you like.
A part kit is a group of materials with the purpose of making adding and finding materials easier for Work Order.
The top grid is the list of part kits. The bottom grid is the list of materials in the kit.
To edit a material (part), visit Inventory > Inventory Summary.

113
Inventory > Inventory Reports:
Inventory has several reports that you can run. Each report has different purpose.
Inventory > Inventory Reports > (A) Part Below Minimum Report:
Inventory > Inventory Reports > (B) Summary By Warehouse Report:
Inventory > Inventory Reports > (C) Slow Moving Parts Report:
Inventory > Inventory Reports > (D) Parts Reserved by WO Report:

114
Inventory > Inventory Reports > (E) Control Inventory Picklist:
Inventory > ABC:
Use ABC Inventory only with Controlled Inventory.
Use ABC Inventory to manage and control inventory number. This helps count materials in your warehouses to
make sure you have the correct quantity.
Inventory > ABC > ABC Cycle Count Setup:
By default, if Setup does not have any entry, MaintStar will setup A, B, C as shown above. You can make any
changes to it such as number of times count per year, changing frequency, percentage, or you can add more
ABC code to the list such as D, E, and so on.
The “From %” and “To %” indicate the total percentage of cost that the inventory items you want issued (through
transaction historical records) across the whole system.
I

115
Inventory > ABC > ABC Class Update:
This screen is used to assign class to your stock # base on your setup and base on your inventory
transactions. A simple rule here is, 'no transactions, no class; no class, no counting'. Class is displayed
correspondingly to each stock # (column 1) based on the stock usage. Clicking “Update Class” would perform
the task and save automatically.
Inventory > ABC > Counting Sheet:
You can see what parts should to be counted if you want to count, based on your ABC settings, and when the
part was first used.
You can further filter the list using the given parameters.

116
Inventory > ABC > Adjustment Sheet:
This screen basically allows you to enter your physical counting quantity, cost, counting date, then compare with
your current total quantity and cost in MaintStar.

117
Inventory > EOQ (Economical Order Quantity Analysis):
This calculates the Order Quantity based on your 3 inputs Annual Demand Qty, Unit Cost, and Holding Cost.
Inventory > EOQ > EOQ Formula:
Input your Annual Demand Qty, Unit Cost, then down to Holding Cost; if you use holding cost, type it in and click
“Recalculate” and MaintStar will calculates the Order Qty. If you don't use holding cost, just leave it blank and
MaintStar will calculates the Order Qty. By default, holding cost is zero (0.01). If you don't use holding cost, just
leave the holding field unchanged.

118
Inventory > EOQ > EOQ Calculation:
MaintStar offers Invoicing to help with recording costs from work orders.

119
Invoice Summary:
Invoice:
- This screen only shows the basic calculation made to an invoice to acquire the total payment.
- You can still edit small fields like invoice’s date, customer, payment type and comments.
Details:
- You can add either individual Work Order or a Project which contains multiple Work Orders to get the
costs.
- The Work Order will be based off of the Customer for the Invoice.

120
Payment:
- You can add different payments and their type(s) here.
- An invoice can be paid with multiple payments with different or set
amount.
Past Due Report:
- Past Due Report allows you see all the invoices in the system, with the
condition set to the amount of days for invoices that are not closed.
- The Condition tab let you set the parameter(s); the Result tab shows you
the result.
- You can technically see ALL invoices by setting the amount of days in
Condition tab to 0.

121
Mass Deletion:
- Mass Deletion acts as a report for you to see all the invoices in the
system.
- You can filter the invoices via date, number or by the customer.
- You can select multiple invoices for deletion.
Setups:
1. ::Invoicing Default::
- You can setup your last invoice number.
- Invoice terms, like tax and discounts, can be set here and applied to the
calculation in Invoice Summary.
- You can set your Invoice Printout here.

122
Customers::
- You can edit or add customer here as well as in Setup.
- The difference between Invoice Customer and Setup Customer is in
Invoice, you have some specific fields you can work with.
Class Prices::
- You can set the percentage of different part class (material class) here.
- You can also delete any part class here.
- Part classes can be setup via Setup Module. You can add new part
classes via Setup but not in here.

123
(Setup Module, table ‘Part Class’)
Individual Part Prices::
- Individual parts come from Inventory module.
- You can setup their individual Billing amount here.
- You cannot add or delete any part as Inventory module is there for that
purpose. You can only edit the Billing here.
Non-Stock Prices::

124
Labor Rates::
- You can edit a labor’s Bill % Markup Rate here.
- You cannot add or delete or edit specific details about a labor as Setup
module is there to let you edit information about labors.

125
Vendor/Contractor Rates:
- Same idea as Labor Rate. You can edit a vendor (or contractor) Labor and
Part %.
- You cannot add or delete any vendor as Setup module is there for that
purpose.

126
MaintStar Purchase Order
MaintStar offers Purchase Order module as a way to help with inventory purchases.
Module
Purchase Order setup:
Vendor:
- Before diving into Purchase Order (PO), we need to have some basic setups to make a PO’s creation
simpler.
- PO requires a selection of vendor to purchase from. You can create and set up vendors in Setup >
Vendor.
- After setting up Vendor, you can start setting up the default settings for PO.

127
Inventory:
- There are several details needed to be done to your inventory items before giving PO’s to them.
- An inventory item must have a vendor otherwise you cannot issue PO from batches.
- You must have min/max

128
Purchase Orders > PO Control:
Purchase Orders > PO Control > Main P/O Setup > Your Company Address:
- You setup your default address and contact information here.
- All PO will refer to this address as company default.
Purchase Orders > PO Control > Main P/O Setup > Ship To:
- You can setup your default shipping address (one to receive the purchased item).

129
Purchase Orders > PO Control > Main P/O Setup > P/O Number Range:
- P/O Number Range simply allows you to set your own syntax for PO.
Purchase Orders > PO Control > Main P/O Setup > Tax Default:
- You can setup your tax % here.
Purchase Orders > PO Control > Main P/O Setup > P/O Setting:
- You can setup how PO behaves.
- You can partially setup notification for PO as well (Send email when high-cost PO is saved).
- You can select a default approval template in case the PO needs to be approved beforehand.
- You can set default account for the PO, as well as a default Footing for the PO printout.
Purchase Orders > PO Control > Main P/O Setup > Default:
- Default account can help auto-fill the details for account number when adding inventory items.
Purchase Orders > PO Control > Main P/O Setup > P/O Printout:
- Depending on the type of PO, you need to select a printout so you can get a default formatted printout
for it.

130
Purchase Orders > PO Control > More Shipping Address:
- You can add more addresses to the PO setup for shipping addresses.
- Normally, addresses which aren’t added here cannot be selected for different addresses other than
default address.
Purchase Orders > PO Control > PO Approval:
- You can view who has approved the PO and at what PO cost

131
Purchase Orders > Regular PO/Blanket
PO/Requisition PO/Quotation PO > Details:
- Many of the PO’s Detail screen will look very similar to each other.
- The general idea of all of the Details is to add information to your PO.
- All PO MUST have a vendor selected for .
o If you add materials which come from different vendor, you’ll get a confirmation popup.
o Usually, when adding a material, PO will automatically populate the vendor information.
Details (Regular PO):
- Regular PO comes with a standard set of functions:
o “New PO”: simply create a new PO.
o “Save”: You save what you edit for the PO information fields. PLEASE be aware that this “Save”
button WILL NOT SAVE your changes in the table for parts. The table has its own “Save”
button.
o “Approve PO”: you can approve a PO. This will send a notification or email for the approval.
o “Overwrite PO”: you can change the PO’s PO No.
o “Print PO”: if given a printout template, you can print the PO. You can either setup the default
printout in Purchase Orders > PO Control > Main P/O Setup > P/O Printout or select a different
printout to be printed upon confirming printing.
o “More”: will give you an option to delete the PO.

132
Details (Blanket PO):
- Blanket PO comes with a smaller set of functions
o “New Blanket PO”: simply create a new blanket PO.
o “Save”: You save what you edit for the PO information fields. PLEASE be aware that this “Save”
button WILL NOT SAVE your changes in the table for parts. The table has its own “Save”
button.
o “Print Blanket PO”: if given a printout template, you can print the PO. You can either setup the
default printout in Purchase Orders > PO Control > Main P/O Setup > P/O Printout or select a
different printout to be printed upon confirming printing.
Details (Requisition PO):
- Requisition PO comes with a set of functions:
o “New Requisition”: simply create a new requisition PO
o “Save”: You save what you edit for the PO information fields. PLEASE be aware that this “Save”
button WILL NOT SAVE your changes in the table for parts. The table has its own “Save”
button.
o “Approve PO”: you can approve a PO. This will send a notification or email for the approval.
o “Overwrite PO”: you can change the PO’s PO No.
o “Print”: if given a printout template, you can print the PO. You can either setup the default
printout in Purchase Orders > PO Control > Main P/O Setup > P/O Printout or select a different
printout to be printed upon confirming printing.
o “Issue To PO”: you can issue a requisition PO into a regular PO. This will remove requisition
status of the PO which makes this PO ONLY search-able in Regular PO screen.
o “More”: will give you an option to delete the PO.

133
Details (Quotation PO):
- Quotation PO comes with a set of functions:
o “New Quotation”: simply create a new quotation PO.
o “Save”: You save what you edit for the PO information fields. PLEASE be aware that this “Save”
button WILL NOT SAVE your changes in the table for parts. The table has its own “Save”
button.
o “Approve PO”: you can approve a PO. This will send a notification or email for the approval.
o “Overwrite PO”: you can change the PO’s PO No.
o “Print”: if given a printout template, you can print the PO. You can either setup the default
printout in Purchase Orders > PO Control > Main P/O Setup > P/O Printout or select a different
printout to be printed upon confirming printing.
o “Issue To PO”: you can issue a requisition PO into a regular PO. This will remove requisition
status of the PO which makes this PO ONLY search-able in Regular PO screen.
o “More”: will give you an option to delete the PO.
Purchase Orders > Regular PO/Blanket PO/Requisition PO/Quotation PO
> Free Form:
- All of “Free Form” serve the same purpose: to add miscellaneous items into the PO.

134
Purchase Orders > Regular PO/Blanket PO/Requisition PO/Quotation PO
> Summary:
- All of “Summary” serve the same purpose: edit information to either add extra information about the PO,
overwrite some settings to the PO, or both.
- “Ship to Different Address”: this checkbox allows you overwrite default shipping address set in PO
Control. You’d also need to select your “Ship Code” if you plan to ship elsewhere other than default
address.
o “Ship Code” selections can be setup in PO Control > More Shipping Addresses.
- “Tax Rate” default value also comes from PO Control > Main P/O Setup > Tax Default. You can
overwrite that value here for specific PO.

135
Purchase Orders > PO Batch Issue:
- By default, PO Batch Issue will automatically pull up all the inventories (materials) that are below their
Minimum Quantity (available quantity < minimum quantity).
- NOTE: under certain scenario, PO Batch Issue will not pull up the inventories even if the available
quantity is less than minimum quantity. Example:
o Given an inventory item with minimum quantity = 50 and the available quantity is about 20.
o If there’s already an order to purchase about 30 extra units, the order quantity then exceeds the
amount available.
o In this case, the inventory item won’t automatically show up to the PO Batch Issue.
- You can also add more items to the batch.
- Each item must have an order value > 0.
- After filling up the batch with the needed amount of inventory items, you can then “Issue WO” to create
PO’s.
- Upon issuing the batch, you’ll be greeted with this popup:
o You must choose one of the options to proceed.
o After choosing one, you’ll be greeted with another popup.
o This popup shows your confirmation. You can either print each of the PO out or just click OK
and view the individual PO by clicking their number (for hyperlink).

136
Purchase Orders > PO Batch by Warehouse:
- Similar to PO Batch Issue, you can also issue PO in batches.
- The main difference is that you get to select inventory item base on the warehouse they belong to.
- You’ll be greeted with this popup upon entering the screen to select a warehouse.
- There will be a list that automatically populates the inventory items which are below their minimum
quantity (just like PO Batch Issue).
- Check out NOTE in Purchase Orders > PO Batch Issue for more information about what will be
automatically populated.
Purchase Orders > PO Mass Deletion:
- Mass Deletion allows you to delete one or multiple PO’s.
- You can filter out the range, type or vendor of PO

137
-
MAINTSTAR 15
QUICK ASSET
MANAGEMENT
GUIDE
Quick explanations on getting
started with MaintStar 15, Asset
Management Module.
MaintStar
Phone: 800-255-5675
28 Hammond
Email: WWW://Maintstar.com
Irvine California 92618

138
MAINTSTAR15 ASSET MANAGEMENT MODULE
Asset Management Module provides a variety of setups and planning, as well as simulations, on a network of
assets.

139
CAPITAL PLANNING
Capital Planning allows the allocation of cost, percentage, and annual budget
planning for assets.
Setup
- The main purpose of Setup is to provide a fiscal year and the number of years the planning will take place.
Fiscal Calendar
- This screen simply shows the list of fiscal year and their start/end dates.

140
Replacement Schedule by Asset Type
- This report helps identify the number of replacements being done on certain asset type base on the year
across a number of years starting with the first fiscal year from the Setup screen.
Replacement Schedule by Subtype
- Same idea as the Replacement Schedule by Asset Type, with finer separation for SubType.

141
Replacement Schedule by Asset
- Same idea as the Replacement Schedule by Asset Type, with finer separation for individual assets
(indicated by asset ID).
Sites
- ‘Sites’ is a tool to help identify parent and children assets
- A ‘Site’ is basically a parent asset. Each ‘Site’ contains 3 subtabs: Assets, Asset Lines, and Plans.
- The idea of ‘Sites’ is to breakdown a huge asset into multiple children assets and create plans and
budgets for each child asset.

142
Sites > Assets
- A ‘Site’ may contain at least 1 child asset. An ‘Asset’ is basically a child of a site.
- You can select an ‘Asset’ and move onto ‘Asset Lines’ tab to start the planning and budgeting.

143
Sites > Asset Lines
- You can add 1 or several ‘Bids’ to a single ‘Asset’. Each ‘Bid’ may contain descriptions and costs of your
plan and budget.
- After all the costs have been allocated and decided on, you can hit ‘Create Plan’ and the system will
save a ‘Plan’ which contains detailed and summary costs for the asset and its ‘Bid’.
Sites > Plans
- You can view all the ‘Plans’ you created for the ‘Asset’ here.
- You can even check which ‘Asset’ and ‘Bid’ a ‘Plan’ is related to.

144
MASS CHANGE
- As the name suggests, Mass Change allows you to edit a certain field about an asset. That edit, then, is
applied across the entire system.
Update
- You can select single field which you want all assets to share the value as.
- By default, all assets will get this updated.
Criteria
- With criteria, you can filter out which asset you want the update to happen to, base on the condition selected.

145
Preview/Apply
- You can view the entirety of the selected assets (all if there’s no filter) and what value the column(s) will get.
- Hit the ‘Update Data’ to apply mass update.
History
- You can view all the columns from asset_hdr table here and check the amount of rows (records) that gets
updated.

146
ASSET RATING WIZARD
This is how you automate a fueling transaction.
Rules
- You can retrieve all the rules of a certain asset type.
- For each asset type, you can add several rulings.
- Whichever asset type you select here will be auto-filled for the Asset tab (the next tab) for the list of
assets.
Asset
- You can select your workgroup and asset type to retrieve all the assets of that asset type.
- The asset type can be prefiltered via Rules tab.

147
Preview
Summary Report

148
COF WIZARD
- You can retrieve multiple asset types and setup their COF for any new asset of that asset type.
CRITICALITY WIZARD
Criteria
- You can setup the criteria for specific or all assets within a workgroup.
- These settings will play to the Rules and output in View Details.

149
Rules
- This rule of calculating Criticality is constant and standardized. This screen exists to show the equation.
View Details
- The output for View Detail is calculated by the Rules with the given criteria (for filtering and calculation) from
the Criteria screen.

150
REGISTRY
- Registry allows you to edit specific properties of an asset.
- You can either edit individual values in a row, or you can mass edit multiple main values all at once via
‘Properties’ button (requires a selection of at least 1 row)
- These are the available properties to edit (aside from the columns on the grid).

151
KPI
KPI Definition
- You can define a KPI and some of its details, as well as the formula.
- You can calculate an individual KPI via the click of “Calculate” button. You can calculate all KPI’s by
clicking “Calculate All” button.
- The [<] and [>] buttons allow you to move between tab sequentially. If you know your step, you can click
directly to the tab.

152
Variables
- Shows a list of variables applied for the KPI.
History Grid
- This shows the result of the KPI. For future reference, the history grid will record and keep the latest record of
the day instead of multiple (if multiple calculation is done in one day for the same KPI).

153
History Graph
- This shows a representation of the value across a period of time. Usually indicative of the date in the formula.
Change Log
- This records any update to the kpi.

154
LIFECYCLES
Lifecycle Setups
- You can copy and paste the Lifecycle settings of 1 asset type to the other.
Overviews Report by WG

155
- You can choose a workgroup and a bar chart to generate visualizations for the result set.
Overviews Report by Type
- This report is similar to Overview Report by WG, with the difference being the selection of Asset Type
instead of Workgroup.

156
Aging Replacement Cost Report by WG
- This report shows the cost by quarters, with filter by Workgroup.

157
Aging Replacement Cost Report by Type
- Similar to Aging Replacement Cost Report by Workgroup, with the difference in selecting the filter by
Asset Type instead of Workgroup.

158
Aging Replacement Count Report by WG

159
Aging Replacement Count Report by Type
- Similar to Aging Replacement Count Report by WG, with the difference in filtering by Asset Type instead of
Workgroup.

160
AM REPORTS
Risk Matrix
Rating

161
Recap
Aging Reports

162
Alert
- The options for ‘Last 30 Days’, ‘Last 60 Days’ and so on allows auto fill the
date range, with the current date as the anchor day (to-day). The from-day
will be automatically calculated by the range selected. You can also input
the dates manually.
Acquisition

163
Disposal
Claims

164
Probability of Failure
Consequence of Failure

165
SIMULATION SETUP
Networks
- A simulation network can handle multiple asset types.
- Asset Unit indicates what kind of value the simulation will take into account.
Deterioration Model
- This shows the kind of deterioration the simulation will try to achieve.
- Degradation is a setup which requires its own menu. The model will achieve deterioration via this
degradation setting.

166
States
- This is simply the setting for different states of the asset during the simulation.
- An asset can follow these different states to indicate its life. Lower states are better (since the asset is
younger and has longer remaining life)
Risks
- Similar to States, Risks shows the different risk level an asset can have. Risk level corresponds to the
age of the asset.
- Lower risks are better.

167
DEGRADATION
- Common degradation graph would look something like this.
- You can setup degradations and their levels here.
- Degradation [LEFT]: the model of degradation you want to simulate on.
- Degradation [RIGHT]: different levels of the degradation, signified by the Age Yrs indicating the
expected asset’s life. The younger the age, the higher the scoring.

168
SIMULATION
- You can add new simulation here for different assets or degradation curves.
- [Not Finished]
- Simulations run on 2 different conditions: budget and non-budget.

169
MAINTSTAR 15
QUICK FLEET GUIDE
Quick explanations on getting
started with MaintStar 15, FLEET
Module.
MaintStar
Phone: 800-255-5675
28 Hammond
Email: WWW://Maintstar.com
Irvine California 92618

170
MAINTSTAR15 FLEET MODULE
Fleet Module is designed specifically to help aid special features that a fleet-oriented user requires. Fleet Module
utilizes assets with a ‘Vehicle’ checkmark as a ‘Vehicle,’ adjusts meters and

171
VEHICLES
- This screen shows you the list of assets in the system which are marked ‘Vehicle’. You can filter for any
specific asset using their Make, Model, Year, ID, etc.
- You can click on a Vehicle ID to go to the asset screen for asset’s information.
- Clicking VIN number gives you a pop-up which shows other details of the asset.
(Sample VIN Info Pop-up)

172
FUEL ENTRY
- Fuel Entry allows you to add/update/delete any fuel entry of a vehicle.
- Stock Number would be your inventory item’s Stock Number. In this case, it’s an OIL type.
- More for manual entry of a fueling transaction.

173
FUEL INTERFACE
This is how you automate a fueling transaction.
FUEL INTERFACE > FUEL DATA
UPLOAD
- You can upload your .txt file of choice and run the file. The formatting of the file can be selected to be
interpreted differently (see FUEL SETUP).
- When run, a grid will be generated to show the assets and the fuels they’re using.
- You can also choose what kind of layout the grid will have. The layout basically shows or hides certain
columns in the result. You can edit the layout in FUEL SETUP.
- The “Run” checkbox determines which interface(s) to run when you press “Start Now”
(or “Start Later”).

174
FUEL INTERFACE > FUEL SETUP
- FUEL SETUP offers 4 different layouts for customization.
- The file being uploaded can either be Raw Data Format or Tab Delimited Format. It’s just however you
want the records to be separated when generate into the grid.
- You can change date format (for front end).
- The purpose of this screen is to map the field name to whichever other program was used to help with
fuel entry.
- You can edit which data to transfer IF they’re invalid.
- The format grid basically translates the data from the 3rd party program into what Maintstar has.

175
FUEL INTERFACE > FUEL
TRANSLATE
- Help translate the name of the assets (vehicles) from the 3rd party program file into maintstar’s
terminology
- These translation tables are just like the Standard translation tables, but they are separate. Notice the
title says that this is “Table 2”. “Table 1” is used for the Standard Mode.
RECALLS
- Purpose: you recall an asset (vehicle) for a fix.
- Recall is manual for version 1.0. There will be an integration with NHTSA in the future.

176
TIRES
- You can add/delete/update different tires.
- You can check ‘Depreciation’ to indicate the tire being out-of-support.

177
TIRES > PARTS
- You can check and edit details regarding the selected tire.
TIRES > ASSETS
- You can add different assets (vehicles) which use the selected tire.
- You can also select which wheel position the tire is equipped to the asset (vehicle). Tire position can be setup
via H.SETUP > TIRE POSITION.

178
TIRES > RECAP
TIRES > REPAIR
- You can add different repair records for the tire.
TIRES > TREAD

179
MOTOR POOL
- Motor Pool is designed to help with asset borrow and reservation.

180
MOTOR POOL > CHECK OUT
- Only assets which have been marked for ‘Motor Pool’ will show up here (visit Asset > Asset Type to
check if your asset is set to be usable by Motor Pool)
- This screen shows the available assets (vehicles) for checking out (for reservation).
- The availability indicates that the asset (vehicle) is not bounded by any other usage in the system such
as being included in a work order or currently being used by someone.

181
MOTOR POOL > CHECK IN
- Once an asset (vehicle) is checked out, it’ll appear in Check In.
- You can check or edit the details of the checked-out asset (vehicle).
- When you check-in an asset (vehicle), it will be put into reservation.
- You can create new work order with any of the selected checked-out asset (vehicle). The newly created
work order will contain the selected asset (vehicle) as its primary asset.
-

182
MOTOR POOL > RESERVATION
MOTOR POOL > HISTORY
- You can view the checked-in/checked-out history of the assets (vehicles).

183
MOTOR POOL > MOTOR POOL
REPORT
- Simple report which filters records of the assets (vehicles) (not limited to motor pool specific vehicles).

184
FLEET REPORTS
FLEET REPORTS > DRIVER LIST
- Shows a list of system users or labor who’s also checked as a ‘Driver’.
FLEET REPORTS > VEHICLE LIST
- Shows a list of assets which are checked as ‘Vehicle’.

185
FLEET REPORTS > ALERTS
- Alerts shows a list of assets (vehicles) with the emphasis on their criticality and severity.
- You can filter the report from 1-month (30 Days) to up to a year.
FLEET REPORTS > CLAIMS
- Claims shows a list of assets (vehicles) with the emphasis on the amount of claims on the assets.
- Clicking the claim number will get you to ASSET CLAIM

186
FLEET REPORTS > LTD VEHICLE
COST
FLEET REPORTS > ACCIDENT
REPAIR COST

187
FLEET REPORTS > FUEL
UTILIZATION

188
FLEET REPORTS > SINGLE PERIOD
POSTING
- NOTE: This report using fuel can only give average cost for fuel, because the amount of fuel used and
the fuel remaining in the tank at the end of each period is not recorded. Unless you top off the tank at
the end of each period, fuel used (gallons) will cross over from period to period.
CALACULATION INFORMATION:
1. Total Miles equals difference the starting and the ending meter. The starting meter is the ending meter
from the last posting period. The ending meter is the last time the vehicle meter was updated by work
orders, or any fuel, oil, liquids or tire transaction like, manual meter changes in the setup system or
updating the meter at posting time. For the most accurate calculations, the meter should be read and
recorded on the last day of the period. Vehicle meters can be easily updated at posting time.
2. Total Gallons are the total gallons from the fuel transactions for the period. Unless you top off the tank
at the end of each period, fuel used (gallons) will cross over from period to period.
3. Variable Cost Per Mile is the total cost of everything minus fixed depreciation cost divided by total miles.
4. Miles Per Gallon Total Miles divided by total gallons from all fuel transactions for the period. Fuel can
only give average cost for fuel, because the amount of fuel used and the fuel remaining in the tank at
the end of each period is not recorded. Unless you top off the tank at the end of each period, fuel used
(gallons) will cross over from period to period. Since this amount will vary from period to period, over
several periods the cost will average out.
5. Cost Per Mile This is the total cost divided by the total miles.

189
FLEET REPORTS > 12 PERIODS
COST
- Shows costs on an amount of assets (vehicles) in a given year, divided up into 12 periods (months).
- This screen selects a report based on posting periods showing the total cost per vehicle for
12 periods. This report is used for comparisons. The report can be selected to run total cost,
meter readings or total fuel cost.
FLEET REPORTS > MILEAGE TREND

190
FLEET REPORTS > EQUIP METER
COST SUMMARY
FLEET REPORTS > TIRE SUMMARY

191
FLEET REPORTS > METER TRANS
HISTORY
- CALACULATION INFORMATION: The total miles equals difference between the first transaction meter
and the last transaction meter. To calculate the total gallons, the first transaction gallon quantity is
subtracted from the total gallons. The reason is because this way the first transaction provides the starting
meter reading with a full tank. Using this information the cost/mile and miles/gallon can be calculated.

192
DRIVERS
- Drivers are basically labors recorded in the system who are checked as ‘Driver’
- All drivers, upon creation, are active.
- You can select 1 or multiple assets (vehicles) the driver’s currently driving.
- you can only remove drivers, cannot add new one. Add new driver via either Setup > Labor or Security > User
(don’t forget to check them as ‘Driver’)

193
SETUP
SETUP > POSTING
SETUP > CURRENT POSTED METER
SETUP > HISTORY POSTED METER
SETUP > FUEL

194
SETUP > STOCK BY VEHICLE
SETUP > TIRE POSITION
SETUP > FAILURE GROUPS
SETUP > ACTIVITY CODES

195
SETUP > FAILURE CODES

196
ASSET ACQUISITION
- Asset Acquisition allows user to record the origin of an asset, how it’s acquired and what are the historical bids.
- You can deactivate an acquisition to mark it as no longer available.
ASSET ACQUISITION > BIDS
- You can add multiple bids in 1 acquisition.
- All bids are active by default.

197
ASSET ACQUISITION > ASSET BIRTH
CERTIFICATE
- You can record as many assets under the same acquisition as you’d like.
- A newly acquired asset should be active.
ASSET DISPOSAL
- You can record how an asset was disposed after being inactive.

198
MASS DELETION
- Mass Deletion offers an easy solution to delete multiple transactions involving a vehicle and/or fuel.
MASS DELETION > DELETE TIRES
- Deleting tires comes with an extra screen for better filter.

199
Work Planning
MaintStar version 15 and above
What is Work Planning
Work Planning is a business management method of identifying and evaluating
activities that an organization performs, using activity-based costing to carry out
a value analysis to improve strategic and operational decisions in an
organization. It is also known as Activity based Management.
The Traditional Work Order
It has been said that ‘a work order shows what you did, work planning
shows you what you need to do’.
Traditional work management systems rely on the Work Order to be the record
that captures a work effort. The Work Order is a record of many aspects of a
particular job.
Each Work Order is identified with a unique number.
Key details that a Work Order captures:
• Date of work initiation
• Date of work completion
• Type of work performed
• What assets were involved in the process
• Where the work was performed
• Identity of who did the work and resulting time and cost. This could be
internal staff or outside contractors.
• Parts and materials used and their cost
• And numerous other bits of information based on management needs
The traditional work order has two primary purposes
1. It is initially used as a set of instructions to staff to perform some work or
repair service. It tells the staff where to go and what to do.
2. After the service is performed it becomes an historical record of the work.
It captures activities performed and costs related to the performance of the
activities. The costs for the work, is rolled into the history of the assets that
were worked on.

200
Work Planning is a higher-level view than a Work Order
Work Planning builds on what the work order captures from a higher
perspective. The work plan seeks to analyze key activities that the organization
performs and not just capture costs of their execution, but to establish goals for
future accomplishment. These future goals for activities and established for
accomplishment value and for expected cost, based on available resources.
The Plan can then be compared to actual accomplishment and actual cost to
determine if the organization is on track to meet the established goals, or if
resources should be adjusted to gain efficiency.

201
Work Planning
Work Planning Module
Planning and Budgeting for Municipalities.
Overview
MaintStar’ s unique new Work Planning System is specifically designed for
municipalities to track varieties of daily activities, such as roads, sewers, traffic
signs and other infrastructures repairs/replacements. This module is designed
as a financial tool and activities driven. It provides a great degree of details for
budgeting purposes, and in addition to planning capabilities, tracks actual
amount of works performed against budgeted.
The infrastructure planning capabilities includes specific equipment
requirements, (trucks, bulldozers, sweepers, etc.) materials needed (concrete,
paint, etc.) as well as crew size planning. It also tracks crew productivity and
provides automatic cost roll up to specific city department, subdivision, multi-
level cost center, area etc.
The planning capabilities provide a great degree of built in flexibility and can be
implemented on weekly, monthly, quarterly, or annual basis. These capabilities
are very specific. It includes financial and budgeting parts and should not be
confused with a regular work orders processing to track estimated work against
actual.
The Work Planning and Budgeting system can be purchased as a standalone
system or as an integrated part of Maintstar system.
Due to complexity of initial setup, we strongly recommend training and system
implementation assistance for this module. Your investment in training and
setup will save you hundreds of man hours and will relieve you from reentering
all information over.

202
Definitions
Definitions:
To project a budget for labor, materials and supporting equipment requirements,
the following information needs to be entered in Maintstar and planning module
setup first.
Management Unit: (previously called Administrative System) Department,
division, project or specific cost center to budget-Maintstar setup
Activity-specific task performed on the field.
Work quantity: the total volume of work per specific type of jobs, which is called
Activity. For example, in case of estimating road-paving activities, how many
total miles of roads need to be paved. IN this example the activity is road paving
and the Work Quantity is miles of road that got paved
Quantity per unit: unit of measure = 1 mile
Average daily productivity –how many units produced per day by crew. Example:
10 miles/day per crew
Crew: group of people performing specific tasks
Total crew days required = total work quantity/crew daily productivity
Unit cost =budget/total work quantity (including labor and materials)
Account Number-Specific cost center-from Maintstar setup.

203
Example: We budget monthly to pave 100 miles of roads per month. The job to
be performed by a maintenance crew consisting of:
One supervisor
Two paving specialists
Two track driver
Two helpers
Equipment to be used:
1 Dump track = 3 hours a day
1 Paving vehicle = 8 hours a day
Budgeting period: The ‘time’ for which budget is setup and tracked (week,
month, quarter, year)
Percentage of activities distribution: percentage of total labor, equipment
required, and materials distribution per each activity for each Management Unit
for specific budgeting period.
Example: If we budget for a 12 monthly periods, streets paving may represents
8% of total daily activities for an entire maintenance department. The
maintenance department may perform other activities, such as streets
sweeping, trimming trees, repairing road drains, etc.
% default come from an activity code setup.
Each activity must have a specific unique I/D or code.
Example: Streets paving code = 0001
Streets sweeping code = 0002, etc.
Labor days =total crew days x crew size / % per month
For the above example for the following paving crew consisting of:
One supervisor
Two paving specialists
Two track drivers
Two helpers
If we are planning on a weekly basis, and a crew works 5 days a week,
The total crew labor days =5x { (2people x1 1=full day for 2paving
specialists+1x1(1 paving vehicle driver) +2x1( 2 helpers) + 1X 0.25-dump truck
driver which works only part time-one quarter of a day on this activities }=5.25
man days X 5 days per week=26,25 crew total man days per week required to
accomplish streets paving.
The same estimation can be created for other type of activities.
With this in mind, we will start entering initial data in a planning module setup.

204
Work Planning Menus Version 15 and above
• The Work Plan menu has been simplified into four sections:
o Work Planning Setup
o Actual Entry
o Work Plan reports
o Tools
Work Planning Setup menu
The Work Planning setup section has several tabs across the top of the screen.
These tabs were separate menu items in earlier versions of MaintStar. They had
menu letters in earlier versions. They are now grouped together in one section.
We have kept the original letter next to the tab name as a reference.

205
Setting up Work Planning
Click on Work Planning module, then click on Work Planning Setup
NOTE: screen shots may not match exactly with examples, instead giving some
ideas of where the fields are located and how the screen looks like.
If you want to set up Holidays as non-working days do this first in the set-up
table Holidays. You must do it before setting up calendar.

206
Calendar setup
(Option S.)
Start by setting up your fiscal year in the Calendar tab.
his setup choice allows you to establish the budgeting time periods. Click on
T
New button on a tool bar, then enter budget year. For example, 2021.
Note: Be Careful!!! If you check the check box to the left of a year line, a delete
icon will appear next to the add button. DO NOT DELETE a line if it has valid
data as it will not be retrievable.
Enter starting day of the fiscal year. Example 01/01/21
Enter number of budgeting periods in the period # column, for example 12 for
the monthly periods, or 52 for a weekly. NOTE: please make sure you decide
to go with weekly or monthly before setting up and saving your work.
Enter 1 in the Frequency number column if we budget on a monthly or weekly
basis. It means one period per month or per week. Note: if you budget on a
quarterly basis you may enter 3 since there are three months in a single quarter.
• Using drop down selection in the Unit column select budgeting units
(weeks, months, etc.)

207
• Click in the Default check box to indicate that this is a current budget we
are going to work on.
• Select from the date format drop down lookup the date format you want to
be displayed
Manual Entry: there are two options here.
-Crew Days: will be calculated automatically base on the current month and year
when the Current Year button and the Hours button is clicked.
-Percentage: the workdays shown in the year details grid at the bottom of the
screen, are calculated based on the percentage template that is setup under tab
‘Percentage Templates M.’
-Leave the Budget Factors blank for now, it will be explained under option A.
later,
-Default Template: you will need to setup the template under Tab M and update
it here.
-Click on Current Year button to select the working days for each month. You
can change the working days by changing the numbers directly and working
hours for each day by clicking on the hour buttons and view the changes. Click
on Save Changes button if you want to keep the changes and click on Save
button on the top of the current year table.
-Number of monthly working days can be edited right from this screen if required
by clicking on specific month
(this screen shows the columns on the right-hand side)

208
In the Budget Factors columns enter any additional cost required if needed for
this budget to be added on top for labor, equipment, material, non-general
funds, etc. Otherwise skip it
(example overhead cost, extra labor burden distribution and other one lump sum
costs-if required.)
For instance, if you need to increase 10% to the total labor cost, you will put
1.10. So, if your total labor cost is $100.00, then the total labor cost for the
budget is $110.00.
Don’t forget to click on Save upon completion.
The calendar setup is completed.
Click on Exit button to close the window.

209
System Equipment Setup
System Equipment Type Setup
(Option Q.)
This is the same screen as System/Equip Types under Maintstar Setup Module.
This menu choice allows you to setup equipment types or groups based on its
functionality which will be used for planning setup chart.
For example, we will be using dump trucks, sweepers, and paving equipment for
performing specific activities.
This is the same setup choice as under main Maintstar setup menu. You may
add some additional equipment types here if required.
You can edit a line by clicking on edit on the left column. If you click the edit at
the very top of the list, all entries will be opened for editing simultaneously.
Enter hourly rate for equipment usage and estimated percentage of downtime
(for example: a dump truck on average is used at 89% of its capacity, the rest
11% of time is spent on repairing it and performing a PM tasks.
Enter Billing Rates, and Remarks if required then Save upon completion.
- Rate/Hr.: will be used under option A. (work planning)
- Down Time %: will be used under option B which is in the report section
“Recourse Requirement report’ for Equipment only.
- Billing/Hr: will be used under the “Actual Entry,“ menu section. This is the
same as Billing Rate for Equip Type under Setup.

210
Materials Setup
Materials Class Setup
(Planning menu, Option P.)
This screen is the same as Part Class under Maintstar Setup Module.
This menu choice allows to setup categories of materials to be used. For
example, for road repairs different type of concrete may be used. Here we will
identify just a generic group of materials - we call it Class.
Click on New, then enter material class, description, then unit name (example
concrete we would measure in cubic feet, then cost per unit. This menu choice
is like Maintstar replacement parts class setup. Save upon completion.

211
Labor Setup
Labor Trade Setup
(Planning menu, Option O.)
This screen is the same as Trades under MaintStar Setup Module.
This menu choice allows to establish labor trades and corresponding rates.
Example, Lead Utilities Operator $96.49/hr
Click on New, then enter labor trades and rates. Click on Save when finished.

212
Activity Programs Setup
Activity Programs Setup.
Planning menu, Option N.)
(
This screen must be done here in Work Planning module.
A group of individual activities is called a program. Example, street repair can be
a Program. It consists of a variety of activities (tasks), such as sweeping,
paving, removing old pavements, etc.
- Deleting a line: highlight a line and click on delete (scissors). If the line is
blank, save it then delete.

213
Activity Percentage Distribution Template
Percentage Distribution Template
(Planning menu, Option M.)
This template will be used under Option S (calendar setup) and Option K.
Basically, this menu choice allows to replace a tedious repeatable data entry by
setting up a template which can be reused repeatedly. This template is used to
setup percentage of activities for each budgeting period. For example, streets
sweeping represent 8% of total monthly work. You may establish different
percentage for different periods for example June sweeping represents 8% of
total work, but in July due to upcoming holidays and big crowds it will represent
12 % of total work.

214
You may setup a template for sweeping with 8% activities per each month-must
be total to 100%. for entire year. Enter template id in a template field, then enter
% per each month, then click on Save button on the right side of the window to
save the template. You can save multiple different templates as you need.
Templates are yearly dependent. When you are in this screen, the options you
have are the buttons on the right-hand side.
Note: you can enter your own numbers if it adds up totally 100. The number is
the percentage number
-New/Add: create a new template
-Calculate Highlight Rows: highlight (Ctrl + left mouse clicks) the months you
want to calculate percentage of work equal to 100%, then click this bottom.
-Save: to save your template and changes.
-Select/Return allows you to select a different template then apply to the plans
by clicking on Get Default icon from another screen such as Option L.
-Whole Number: if this box is checked, you can only enter an integer in the
percentage fields. No decimal numbers.

215
Pay Type
The Pay Type table allows you to create different calculations of hourly cost for
Labor pay. When labor entries are made for a technician in a work order or in
direct entry, you can use the pay type field to select a pay type from this table to
be applied to that entry. The formula you se here will adjust the labor rate for the
labor entry.
Click add to add a new pay type.
Give it a name and description.
You have three ways to manipulate the standard base pay rate:
1. HrFactor Pay = This value is a multiplier to the base pay rate. 1.0 is no
change, 1.5 is time and a half, 2.0 is doubletime.
2. Hrfactor Xtra= This value will add to hourly calculation. Example Susan
has an hourly pay rate of $25.00. If the pay rate we apply has a value of 2
in the Hrfactor Xtra, Susan’s rate will be calculated at $27.00 per hour
($25+2).
3. Flat rate= This adds a flat amount for each entry. It would be used if you
have a call out bonus paid if a technician is called out during the middle of
the night etc. A Flat rate of $200.00 will add $200.00 to the normal hourly
rate for a labor entry. Example John was called out during the night to
solve a crisis. He worked for 4 hours. His hourly rate is $30.00.
30x4=120+ 200 flat call out rate =$320.00
Put a check mark in your default pay rate type checkbox, and it will be applied to
labor entries by default.

216
Activity Description
Activity Description.
(Planning menu, Option L.)
This menu choice allows you to create Activity Codes. An Activity code describe
in plain English specific activities steps. The Activity code is a key element in
Work Planning. It tracks “what work was performed”. The Activity code can be
linked to the Activity Programs. Multiple Activity Codes can be link to one
Activity Program.
For instance, we have Activity Program of Road Repair. We can link different
Activity Codes to this Activity Program such as Sweeping, Patching, Curb
Painting, etc.
Note: always save before leaving the screen.
-To change the Activity Distribution Percentage: Click on Get default icon on the
tool bar and select distribution template (from the previous (M) menu choice) to
link to this activities by using Select/Return button, then click OK to save.
-If you made any changes to the Activity after creating the Work Planning, you
must select other activity, save; then re-select the activity, and Save to apply the
new changes.
-If you made changes to the description after creating the Working Planning, it
will not apply the current work planning. You can add the descriptions directly
on the work planning by clicking on the Edit Task, save it, then click on Edit
Task again to close. Another way to apply the text changes is to use option U.

217
Activity Code: example 0001 for paving, then description
Activity Program: (was previously established, example roads repairs), M option.
Inventory Unit: this was done in MaintStar Setup Module, Unit of Measure
(example linear foot). The Inventory Unit can by typed in on this screen only.
Inventory Unit and Work Unit don’t necessarily have to be the same.
Work Unit: this was done in MaintStar Setup Module, Unit of Measure
Same as Labor: if this box is check, the qty work unit will be calculated the
same as the unit of the labor cost. Normally, in most cases this box should not
be checked; but, for Meetings example above, this box should be checked since
you don’t have the quantity for meetings; so, the qty is the ‘same as labor’
Work Location: comes from Maintstar Setup Module, locations setup
Low and High: not used at this point

218
The four windows below are text instruction windows for the project. See screen
shot above.
You must fill them out before going to Option A, or you can leave it blank and fill
it in later under Option A., Edit Task.
- Description of Work
- Planning Criteria
- Work Method, Check Point
- Note

219
Management Unit
(Previously called -Activity System)
Management Unit Setup.
(Planning menu, Option K.)
Note: each level MUST be saved before next level is entered. Each level has its own Labor,
Equipment, and Material Available.
This portion of setup may be quite challenging to comprehend. We recommend on site assistance and training to
provide proper guidance as well as insurance that it is done right.
The management Unit is a way to structure a numerical code sequence which represents hierarchical levels in
the structure of the organization. The code structure indicates the level and relationship of each work group in
the hierarchy. The numerical coding has a purpose and must be created in the following format.
When we do planning, Maintstar allows to plan for multiple departments which may be structured in hierarchical
order. Example the planning to be done for a Public works department (first level) which consists of the
following sub departments or units (level 2)
1-Streets
2-Parks
3-Sewer
4-Waste Water and so on…
The streets department may consist of two following sub departments (level 3)
Highways, Local Roads, and so on…
We can budget for the entire Public Works with drill down up to 8 levels. With such capabilities you may budget
for practically any size of operation (remember, to locate any individual in the entire 6 billion universe we may
need just about 7 levels-Country, City, Street, etc.)

220
Management Unit (MUST BE UNIQUE) can be a department of organization for which we are setting the plan.
Management Unit can be also a specific project, which needs to be tracked.
Management Unit is identified by the Management Number which is a specific account or cost center where cost
is charged. It can be broken down in hierarchical order up to 8 levels-for management reporting. Make sure to
click on Save (OK) button for each administrative Number or before exiting the screen.
Management Unit is a specific Dept or project which needs to be tracked.
The Management Unit Number (accounting number) consists of 8 levels (displayed at a top of the screen-8
fields)
We use dashes in this example to show different levels of reporting structure and indicate separate fields of
entry.
Each layer down in the organization adds an additional digit to the Management Unit number.
The example of a Management Unit Number is 111PB can be entered in the first left field (up to 5 alpha-
numeric characters)-we will call this field first level. For example, 111PW can be Public Works Department.
Then one alpha numeric character can be entered in each of next 7 fields. -we will call these sub levels
If we add another character (1) to the next field, we will have for example:
Streets sub department UNDER Public Works 111PW-1
Under Streets sub department-Signs department 111PW-1-1
Under Streets sub department-General Maintenance sub department 111PW-1-2
Parks sub department UNDER Public Works 111PW-2 and so on.
Example: We entered 111PW-1, then Save.
To enter the next Management Unit #, 111PW-2 just override last character of previous entry, for example
character 1 with 2, then click on Save. Now we entered two accounting numbers 111PW-1 and 11PW-2.
To view the previous Management Unit number, use Green left pointing arrow. To view next Admin No. use right
Green arrow or click on the Open Search to search for other Management Units.
Each level of Management Unit Number (Cost Account No) needs to be linked with corresponding Management
Unit (project, for example).
Basically, Management Unit as mentioned above is a project, which needs to be tracked. The cost will be
charged to specific Accounting Number – we call it Management Unit Number which we just finished setting up in
our example. Now we are going to setup a linkage between Management Unit and corresponding Admin.
Number. Another words, we need to indicate which projects are charged to which accounts.
Please enter all Assets in the asset section which are identified as equipment. They are created in the asset
section of MaintStar. Equipment use will be planned for and tracked in the Work Plan. Equipment would be
vehicles such as trucks, graders, dozers, and other heavy equipment. Equipment could also be smaller items
such as mowers, generators etc.
Then come back and using Drop down windows select specific Equipment-(right side of the screen) for
displayed Management Unit Number Streets Repairs. Then save.
To assign more Systems to next Management Unit Number, override information in a Management Unit Number
field by typing it over, then link is with Management Unit using drop down window, then Save after each entry.
This linkage is mandatory, please complete it prior to going through next steps.
Note: Each System linked to specific accounting level can be entered only once and cannot be reused for a
different Administrative Number. All linkages must be unique. Example Project A (Management Unit A) will be
always charged to Administrative Number 11PW-1. You cannot charge the same project A to another Admin.
Number 111PW-12, or 11AB-124,etc.

221
Deleting or Changing Management Unit:
Go to Management Unit menu, open the search link, select the Management Unit you need to delete or
change, click the check box on the line for the management unit you want to delete. The delete icon will appear
over the list. click the delete trash can to delete.
After entering Management Unit information, we can proceed to the next step.
At the bottom of the screen we show 12-month calendar (can be also setup on a weekly basis-up to 52 weeks)
This information comes from Calendar setup (Planning menu, sub Option R)
This calendar can be setup based on 8 working hours per day-default. Or 9 and 10 hours per day if required.
This calendar also indicates number of working days per month (excluding weekends)
If you check boxes on the left side, it will include weekends and holidays. The holidays schedule setup is under
Maintstar Security module).
You may override number of working days available per each month right on the screen, then Save.
Entering Labor, Equipment, and Material Resources.
The next step is to enter departmental resources required to each level to perform all jobs.
Basically, we will enter labor available (Labor Trades and number of people per trade, then Materials available
and Equipment available to perform a job. For example, Streets department has 10 drivers, 3 electricians, 5 sign
inspectors and 10 trucks.
For each accounting level you can setup this information. The setup for each level or department is independent,
so we will not roll up labor and equipment resources at this moment to upper level. It will be done through
reporting later.
Click on specific Administrative accounting field (up to 8 levels) then click on Tab -Labor Available-top of the
screen. The labor entry screen will be displayed. Click on New, then enter specific trades and quantity of people
per trade. Upon completion click on Save. You may enter as many trades as you like.
Upon completion Click on Equipment Available Tab and enter equipment information.
Upon completion Click on Materials Available Tab and enter materials information.
Repeat this entry for each accounting Administrative Number code AND each Administrative System.
Exit-Exit the current window or to previous open window
Red Arrows-Click on any Management Unit level, then use arrows to view/edit other Administrative Systems
attached to the same level.
Tip: Using Find button you may also see multiple Administrative Systems attached to specific level.
The first part of the general setup is completed. Now we are ready for a Planning Screen Setup

222
Work Planning Screen Setup
Work Planning Screen Setup
Planning Menu, Option A.
-The bottom section shows the budgets for the whole Management Unit that includes one or more activities, with
the total Labor Days for all Activities, and total Daily Employees for all activities. The Planned Budget in the
middle right hand side is the planned budget for one activity of the current screen.
-The middle section shows the percentage distribution template, labor days, and crew days for the current
activity.
-The Left and Right Green Arrows will display all activities within the Admin System, or the next admin system.
-Edit Task icon: allows you to edit the activity tasks. Click on the icon to edit. Click on the icon again to turn off.
-
Type: select Activity
Code: you must type in the exact activity code that was done under option K
Image Location: double click on the line and look for your image, then Save and exit
Click on the New icon to obtain the Working Planning #.
Note: make sure to Select Admin Sys and Activity Code before clicking on Save button for the plan to be
calculated properly.
Note: the system is designed as a planning financial and management tool, not as a fixed program. Meaning
that you can use this menu option to manipulate the program in different ways. Upon setup completion you
would need to manipulate these information to obtain a specific result.
This screen provides an annual plan visual information on a monthly –12 months (or weekly-52 weeks) basis for
labor days and cost distribution per specific activity.
The initial selection whether the planning is to be done on the weekly or monthly basis is under Planning Module
Menu, Option R-Calendar setup. Please do not switch from weekly to monthly planning at your discretion or vice
versa. This is a one time setup. Decide up front and stay with it until the end of the planning year.

223
This screen allows us to link activity to each Administrative System, ( specific department or project) so we can
calculate later on a monthly basis labor requirements per Administrative System.
An Management Unit may have multiple activities attached to it. . For example, for Streets departments the
following activities are to be performed:
1-sweeping
2-Streets repairs
3 Signs and traffic lights inspection.
Linking Management Unit with corresponding Activity
Let Maintstar know which activities need to be performed per Administrative System, a linkage needs to be
established. You MUST complete all fields in Activity Code (option K) before linking to Management Unit. Click
on New, select Management Unit using drop down window, then select Activity code. For instance, Management
Unit = Streets, Activity Code=Asphalt Repairs, Sweeping, etc.
Labor Tab – Equipment Tab – Material Tab
Note: make sure to click on Save (OK button) for the Work Planning to be calculated properly. If changes are
made elsewhere after the Work Planning has been done, make sure to click on Save for the work planning to be
re-calculated.
-Labor Tab (labor cost): this is hourly rate, and Qty is 1 person, not 1 hour. Click on labor tab, then click on Add
Detail icon on the top toolbar (icon looks like a clipboard) if you need to add a worker. Click on Trade drop down
box to select a worker; description and rates should be filled in automatically, this was set up under option N.
(Labor Trades). You can manually change the rate if you wish. To add another Trade just hit enter or click on
Add Detail. Total Labor Rate will be multiplied by the hours a day based on the calendar setup template. Total
Labor Cost = Total Rate * Hrs a Day * Crew Days
To add additional workers, click on the Add Detail icon again. To delete worker, click on the worker, then click
on the Del Detail icon (red scissors). Clicking on the wrong scissors will delete the Work Planning#, but you will
be confirmed.
-Equipment Tab (equipment cost): this is hourly rate, and Qty is 1 equipment. Click on Equipment Tab, then
click on Add Detail to add Equipment. Add and delete should be the same as Labor above. These pieces of
equipment were setup under option P. To delete equipment, click on the equipment, then click on the Red
Scissors. Total Equipment Rate will be multiplied by the hours a day based on the calendar setup template.
Total Equipment Cost = Total Equipment Rate * Hrs. a Day * Crew Days
-Material Tab (material cost): this is daily rate. Click on Material Tab, then click on Add Detail to add material.
These materials were setup under option O. Add and delete should be the same as Labor above. To delete a
material, click on a material, then click on the Red Scissors. Material total rate will be multiplied by the crew
days. Total Material Cost = Total Material Rate * Crew Days
-Work Units: this is a yearly work units. Example: 100 trees a year, can be referred as inventory.
-Qty per Unit: this is known as ‘level of effort’. If it is 1, then you can trim 100 trees a year. But if you can only do
50 trees a year, then the qty per unit is 0.5. This is just one example. Different methods can be used depends
on what and how you want to plan.
-Total Work Qty: Work Units times Qty per Units. (100 * 1) = 100
-Daily Work Qty (meaning a day of work qty, and it does not have to be everyday): this is your estimation of how
many trees you can do a day. Some call it ADP (Average Daily Productivity)
-Unit Cost: unit cost = planned budget / total work qty.
-Unit Hours: (Next to Unit Cost) how long it takes to do one unit is:
[(Labor Days) (8 hrs. a day)] / Total Work Qty
-Crew Size: each worker is counted as 1, under Labor Tab, if you have 2 workers, then crew size is 2, or if you
have 1.5 workers, then crew size is 1.5
-Crew Days: equals Total Work Qty divides Daily Work Qty.
Crew Days = Total Work Qty / Daily Work Qty
These crew days then will be divided into 12 months. This is a yearly plan
-Budget Factor: check this box if you want to apply your Budget factor that was setup under
Option S.- Calendar Setup (scroll to the right)
-Labor Days: equals crew size times crew days (labor days = crew size * crew days)

224
-Employees = Labor Days of Budgets Month / Workdays of that month
This is the total number of all employees required for this period, for all activities, and for this admin system
only.
-Lump Sum Budget, Non-General Fund: enter these amount into the boxes if you have any to be added to
Planned Budget.
-Budget Factor Box: if this box is checked, the total Planned Budget will be calculated based on your settings
under Option R, and is calculated as follow:
-Labor (Budget Factor) = (Total Labor Cost * Hrs. a Day * Crew Days * %Labor Factor), then add to the total
Planned Budget (option S)
-Equipment (Budget Factor) = (Total Equip. Cost * Hrs. a Day * Crew Days * %Equip. Factor), then add to the
total planned budget (option S)
-Material (Budget Factor) = (Total Material Cost * Crew Days * %Material Factor), then add to the total planned
budget (option S)
-Lump Sum Budget (Budget Factor) = (Lump Sum Budget * %Lump Sum Budget Factor), then add to the total
planned Budget
-Non General Fund (Budget Factor) = (Non General Fund * % Non-General Fund Factor), then add to the total
planned Budget
-Planned Budget: this is the total amount of the budget for the whole year.
Planned Budget=[[(labor rate * Wk Hr per Day) + (equipment rate * Wk Hr per Day) + (material cost per Day)] *
(crew days) ] + (Lump Sum if any)
-Add if required any overhead Lump Sum Cost and Non-General Funds Cost.
Enter work units and quantity per unit (example: total streets =100 each street is 10 miles Enter average daily
productivity example 5 miles/day
The information can be entered only in yellow fields. Information in gray fields is for viewing only.
Click on Drop down window and select trade. Enter hours required per activities. The rate will be displayed from
previous setup. Click on Add Details button on a tool bar to add another record if required.
Click on Equipment Tab and setup Equipment required per attached activities. Click on Add Details button to
add another equipment
Click on Materials Tab and add materials required. Click on Save upon completion.
To add more activities to the same Administrative system, click on New button on a Tool Bar, then select the
same Management Unit and then select next activities from a drop-down window. Then repeat above steps.
Click on Save upon each entry completion.
To view next activity for the same Management Unit use red arrows on a tool bar. If that was the last activity, you
will be prompted for the next Management Unit displayed.
-To add the Tasks for the Work Planning, click on the Edit Task icon on the toolbar. Finish your tasks, then click
on the Edit Task icon again to close. This task will be printed when you print out the plan. Printouts of the plans
will show all your resource requirements used in the plan.
To add new Management Unit, Click on New, then select Administrative System, then repeat steps above.
The system automatically assigns a unique consecutive work plan number to each work plan sheet-top right. It
also stamps date and time
At the bottom the screen there are two windows are displayed.
The following calculated information will be displayed in a gray fields (no editing)
Crew Size, Crew Days, Unit Cost, Budget

225
The middle window: 12 months or 52 weeks- shows planning information for a single activity
The table is displayed with monthly (or weekly) information and shows projected percentage of a single activity
scheduled monthly. For example, if we want to distribute activity evenly through entire year, we need to input
8,34% per months, which will total approx. 100% for an entire year.
Labor days- shows total annual and monthly or weekly labor days required per single activity.
.
The bottom window:12 months or 52 weeks- shows planning summary budget $ information for all activities for
the whole Management Unit
Employees-Number of employees required per month or week to accomplish all activities. This number could
have a decimal point example, 10,5 employees
The setup is completed. The next step is entering actual daily data in a system to track completed work.
Note: After the Work Planning is set up properly, the main three factor keys here are now the Work Units, Qty
Per Unit, and Daily Work Qty. You will manipulate these three numbers to fit your plan. Let’s look at a few
examples: 100 meetings, 5hrs each meetings, 500hrs total. There are three different ways to manipulate these
three numbers.
Example 1:
Total Hours: 500hrs 500hrs 500hrs
Work Unit: 1year 100meetings 5hrs
Qty Per Unit (effort): 500hr 5hrs a meeting 100meetings
As you can see total hours are 500hrs, but there are three different ways to manipulate these numbers. A)
Adjust the total hours for the whole year B) You want 100 meetings a year, but you want to adjust how many
hours a meeting C )You want 5hrs a meeting, and change the number of meetings.
Example 2:
-Wk Units: 12 meetings
-Qty per Unit: 1 (hour per meeting)
-Total Wk Qty: 12 hrs of meetings
-Daily Work Qty: 16 hrs (assuming you have 2 workers, 8hrs a day. This is the maximum productivity of work
they can do a day)
-Unit Hour: 1 (this has to be 1 when dealing with hours)

226
Example 3:
-Wk Units: 12 meetings
-Qty per Unit: 1 (1 day a month)
-Total Wk Qty: 12 days of meetings
-Daily Wk Qty: 2 days (assuming you have 2 workers, 8hrs a day. This is the maximum productivity of work they
can do a day. Since unit is in days, 16hrs would be 2 days)
-Unit Hour: 1 (this has to be 1 when dealing with hours)
Example 4:
-Wk Units: 1 year
-Qty per Unit: 1200 (draining per year)
-Total Wk Qty: 1200 drainings
-Daily Wk Qty: 5 drainings a day
Example 5:
-Wk Units: 1200 miles
-Qty per Unit: 1 (hour per mile)
-Total Wk Qty: 1200 hrs
-Daily Wk Qty: 5 hrs a day
The above examples are more like planning strategy to meet your budgets or your man hours.

227
Adjusting Labor days calculation
To change the labor days, you must adjust the Qty per Unit as follows:
Labor Days Desired (A)
(A / B * C / D = E)

228
Actual Work Entry
Actual Work Entry
Planning menu, Option F.
The Actual work entry screen has two purposes:
1. It is used to make new work planning entries for Labor, Equipment, Materials, and Work Quantity
quickly. The entries are made in a grid like the LEM section of Work Orders.
2. It is used to retrieve previous entries for editing
The screen is divided into the top half and the bottom half.
• The bottom half is a grid used to make new entries or to display and edit entries that were previously
made.
• The top half of the screen is used to set up common values for several of the fields in the bottom half
grid. By setting them up first in the top half, there are fewer fields that will need to be selected for the
entries in the bottom half. This helps you make the entries quicker and easier.

229
To make Actual Work Planning entries:
1. Make sure the bottom half of screen is clear. Use clear field button if
needed.
2. Set the common values for your entries in the fields at the top
a. Set the date
b. Set the Management Unit and Activity
c. Set Location code and account number if used.
d. Click add entry at the bottom area.
e. A new line will appear with the entry type set for labor because labor
is the most common entry.
f. Complete the line by choosing the technicians name in the code/ID
field. Enter Hours worked (use fractions, 1.5 for and hour and a half).
Pay type if different from the default.
g. The values from the top half should be filled in on the bottom
automatically.
3. To add a second line, you can use the ‘add entry’ button or press the enter
key. The next line will appear, and the same type will be selected. In this
example since we made a labor entry, the next line will be labor. When
you are ready to change to another type of entry such as equipment or
materials, you can change the type drop down. The field will change by
typing the first letter such as L for labor, E for equipment, M for materials
etc.
a. Complete the fields for this entry such as the Id for the person and
hours etc.
4. You can also add crews with the add crew button. (Crews are created in
the Work Order menu section.
5. Follow the same pattern for equipment, materials and contractor.
Work Quantity entry
Work Quantity entry is dependent on the activity chosen. Different activities
have different units of measurements for Work Quantity. Because of this, make
sure your entry before the work quantity, has the correct activity code listed.
The Work Quantity will be displayed with the correct unit of measure for the
previous activity. Example activity potholes, unit of measure might be a count of
potholes. Striping might have a unit of measure the number of miles of striping
performed etc.
The Validate button, Saving the entries
The validate button can be used to check that your entries have entered
correctly and required fields have been entered correctly. When you save the

230
entries, all correctly entered entries will go away on the screen. They will be
saved in the database. IF a line has a problem it will remain on the screen for
you to correct and save again.
APPLY ALL button:
USE WITH CAUTIONS! When the top half window is filled-in with all the
information, you can use this button to apply all the top information to all your
entries on the bottom half screen. Again, it will APPLY TO ALL OF YOUR
ENTRIES, NOT ONE. If you need to make one change to your entry, just go
directly to your entry and make the change to simplify your confusion.

231
Actual Entry - Work Order Entry
*PLEASE NOTE: THIS FUNCTIONALITY HAS CHANGED SIGNIFICANTLY IN VERSION 15*
Actual entries can record activities that are part of a work order or are stand alone.
Actual entries can be used to record events that DO NOT have a related work order. For example, If
you want to record some activities that have no asset but you want to record time and hours, such
attending meetings, or time off etc., the Actual entry screen is a great way to track these activities.
But if you DO have a work order already started, you can make your LEM entries here on the Actual
entries screen if you prefer, instead of making the entries on the work order. To do this, the work order
should be created, and you should know the work order number that you are recording time, materials,
and work quantity to.
You will see a work order field at the top section and on the individual entry lines.
When you have the Work Order identified in your entry lines, (Labor, Equipment, Material, Contractor,
and Work Quantity) THE ENTRIES WILL BE PUSHED TO THE WORK ORDER WHEN YOU SAVE.
This is a NEW function and very powerful. You now have the choice of entering your LEM entries on
the work order directly OR using the very popular Actual entry screen.

232
ENTRY TIPS
This menu choice is designed to enter actual work completed. The entry can be done daily, weekly etc.
Tips for a speedy data entry.
If you would like to eliminate mouse usage for drop down windows data selection , for example in a Type field
enter first character (example L for Labor or Alt + Arrow Down). The same for Code and other dropdown fields.
Use enter key to indicate that a data entry is completed in a current entry line and to create a new line of entry.
Some previously entered information will be defaulted from the previous line of entry, to speed up repeatable
data entry.
To delete a record which is not currently displayed, click on Find to select the record then click on Scissors on a
Tool Bar to delete. Then click on Save.
If the top half screen and bottom half screen are too confusing for you, please ignore the top half screen and just
make your entries right on the bottom half screen.
CLEAR FIELDS button:
is used to clear the top half window; so when the new button is clicked, there will be no default data filled-in in
the fields of your new entry.

233
RETREIVING ENTRIES
The actual entry screen can be used to retrieve entries already made for purpose of review or editing.
RETRIEVE button: retrieving old transactions for editing purposes.
The Fields at the top of the screen can act as filters to search existing records.
Fill in the fields related to your search such as:
• Dates from and to, for a certain date range.
• Select a particular management Unit or activity code.
• If you leave any field empty, the empty field will not be filtered and all values for that field will be shown.
• First, do a lookup and pick an entry, then Retrieve will retrieve related entries that have matching Admin
System and Activity.
Click the Green Retrieve button to activate the search. The results will be shown in the table.
In Editing Mode:
RETRIEVE button: retrieving original old transactions for editing purposes. First, do a lookup and pick an entry,
then Retrieve will retrieve and filter related entries that have matching Admin System, Activity, and Location. If
different changes are made to these related transactions, retrieve feature will not consider them as orginal
transactions, and will not retrieve them as related transactions.
CLEAR FIELDS button: to clear the information on the top half screen.
CLEAR SCREEN button; Clears the bottom half of the screen

234
Work Planning Reports
Rollup/Summary & Group Length Concept:
This feature is for the reports and it works the same throughout MaintStar wherever it is available.
- Rollup/Summary: is used when multiple Adm Systems are selected.
- Group Length: is how far you want to rollup
Example:
- Management Unit # 00001 is M&O maintenance
- Management Unit # 000012 is Road Administration
- Management Unit # 00001221 is Road maintenance
If we ran a report with these three management units selected and checked Rollup/Summary with Group Length
of 5, then we will have the total cost maintenance for the park. As you can see M&O Maintenance #00001 has 5
digits. If we don’t check Rollup/Summary, then we would see a detail report of all three Management Unit In
other words, Rollup/Summary provides the flexibility of summary cost report for any level. Let’s look at another
example below.

235
Running Reports
Running Reports
Resource Requirements (Planning Menu Option B.)
This screen will give you an overview of the resource requirements such as Labors, Equipment, Materials, that
are used under each Management Unit Number. There are three radio buttons for Labor Requirements,
Equipment Requirements, Material Requirements.
-Management Unit: from the dropdown list select a management unit for the report. You can add additional
management units. The ones you have selected appear below the field on the screen. Click on each Tab -
Labor, Equipment, or Material, one by one to view your resource requirements report.
Labor Requirements Radio Button
This screen will show the Labor Resource Requirements for the Management Unit number you selected.
-The second column will show how many Labor Resources available for each type of labor. This available
labor number was set up under Option J. (Management Unit - Labor Available tab).
-The third column is the header (label) for each row
-The fourth column shows the total number of workdays for each type of worker for your Management Unit
# you selected. Ex: you could have Maintenance Worker for one category, and Supervisor for another.
(Note: Workers and Supervisors are created under Option A – Labor Tab).
(Yearly) Workdays = Number of Maintenance Worker * Crew days; the same for Supervisor, etc.
-The Total Workdays then will be divided by 12 to find Monthly Workday.
-Then take the number in each month divide by the number of Calendar Workdays (that was set up under
Calendar Setup Option R., Current Year Button) to find the number of Employee for each day.
-Take the Resource Labor Available minus Employee each day to obtain the remaining available

236
-The Total Manpower: is the sum of all workdays and workers required for the plan. (see screen shot
below)
Equipment Requirements Tab
This screen is almost the same as the Labor screen above.
-To obtain the Equipment Days: Take the Equipment Quantity times Crew Days. (Equipment Qty was
created under Option A – Equipment Tab),
-Take the total Equipment Days divide by 12 to find the number of days the equipment is used in a month.
-Take the number in each month divide by the number of Calendar Working Days = Qty needed a day.
Material Requirement Tab
This screen show the total number of Material Requirement for the whole year.
-Total = Material Qty * Crew Days (this was created under Option A., Material tab)
-Monthly Material = Total / 12

237
Work Planning Reports
Planning Menu, Option C.
Condition Tab
This screen will allow you to run reports by Multiple Management Unit, or by Multiple Activities, or by
Multiple Programs. If you leave all boxes blank, the report will show all your Work Planning, and that will
take a bit longer time to run if you have a big database.
Rollup/Summary and Group Length check box:
Group Length is part of Rollup/Summary. The Group Length option is unavailable when the Rollup box is
not checked.
-If Rollup box is not checked, the report will show the data in detail by default.
-Labor = Rate * 8hrsaday * Crew Days
-Equipment = Rate * 8hrsaday * Crew Days
-Material = Rate * Crew Days

238
Percent / Labor Days Distribution Tab
Select the radio button labeled Percent/Labor Days Distribution.
This screen will show the percentage and labor days distribution for each month throughout the whole year.
This was done under option R., M. and K. The labor days come from your Working Planning (A), then
divided by 12 months

239
Actual Work Report
Actual Work Report
Planning Menu, Option G.
This powerful report has many ways it can be configured. The fields at the top of the screen filter the report data
by date, Management Unit activity etc. If you do not set a value in a field, all data for that value will be displayed.
The radio buttons select 4 different versions of the report
• Actual Work in summary and in detail format
• Cost in detail and summary
Set the conditions you want them click run to display the report.

240
Work Status Report
Work Status Report
Planning Menu, Option H.
This report runs very complicated and sophisticated calculations.
This report runs dramatically faster in version 15.
This screen gives you the report of Period to Date and Year to Date of all the plans you created under option A.
See Option A for further info. and could be from W/O’s. Run your Bi-Weekly reports to find out what w/o’s were
done for the work planning. Throughout our manual we use 8Hrs a day of work.
Work Status (PTD/YTD) Report format (radio button): please see Work Planning (Option A) for further details of
where the numbers come from.
- Plan Days = Labor Days / 12
- Act Days = from Actual Work Entry or from W/O’s Labor Hrs. (4hrs or more = 1 day, 12hrs or more= 2days), or
MISC. Cost. The Labor Date, and Misc. Date is used here, not issued date or target date. The same for parts. It
is suggested that to enter all costs, except labor and material cost, under Misc. Cost Tab so that MaintStar can
generate the productivity report based on the work quantity, and hours.
- Plan Qty = Daily Work Qty * Crew Days (option A)
- Act Qty = from Actual Work Entry or from W/O’s Misc. Cost
- Labor Days Annual Plan = Labor Days (option A)
- YTD Actual are all from the actual entry and, if any, from wo’s labor cost and misc. cost
- Work Qty Annual Plan = Total Work Qty (option A)
- YTD Actual are all from the actual entry and, if any, from wo’s labor cost and misc cost
- Total Cost Annual Plan = Planned Budget (option A)
- YTD Actual are all from the actual entry and, if any, from wo’s labor cost and misc cost
- Hour@Unit Annual Plan = Unit Hours (option A)
- YTD Actual are all from the actual entry and, if any, from wo’s labor cost and misc cost
- Cost@Unit Annual Plan = Unit Cost (option A)
- YTD Actual are all from the actual entry and, if any, from wo’s labor cost and misc cost

241

242
Work Calendar Report format (radio button)
Work Calendar: please see option A for further details
- Labor days = crew size * crew days
Labor days then will be used to divide into 12months to obtain monthly labor days.
- Actual Daily Work Qty:
-Crew Size (for any particular day) = total # of hours of all crew members (A) / by largest
# of hours of any crew member (B)
-Equivalent crew day (C) = total hours of all crew members (A) / (crew size (D) * Standard
workday hours (E))
The above numbers are computed for each day per activity and admin. System. They are then summed by each
activity for all days of time in question. The average daily production = sum of all work quantity (F) / sum of all
equivalent crew days (C)
An example for a 10-hour workday:
09/01/01 – Jim works 8 hours and Jake works 4 hours then leaves. Sara joins Jim and works 2 hrs. They install
5 signs.
09/02/01 – Jim works 5 hours and Jake works 3 hours and Sara works 5 hours. They install 4 signs.
Calculations:
09/01/01: crew size (D) = (8+4+2) / 8 = 1.75; Equiv. crew day (C) = (8+4+2) / (1.75 * 10hrs/day) = .8
09/02/01: crew size (D) = (5+3+5) / 5 = 2.6; Equiv. crew day (C) = (5+3+5) / (2.6 * 10hrs/day) = .5
Work Qty (F) = 5 + 4 = 9 signs
Sum of Equiv. days = .8 + .5 = 1.3
ADP (average daily productivity or work qty) = 9 / 1.3 = 6.9
Overview report format (Radio Button): this screen will give you an overview of the last two screens.

243
Planned Use Summary
Planned Use Summary
Planning Manu, Option J.
This screen will give you a summary report of what you have created under Work Planning Option A comparing
with what you have used under Option F.
- Select your conditions then click on the Result tab to run the report.

244
Rollover Duplication
Rollover/Duplication:
Planning Menu, Option T
This screen allows you to duplicate your previous budget year to the new budget year. If “Apply New Working
Days” box is checked, new working days for the new year will applied automatically. If it is not checked, the new
year will have the same working days as the old one.
BE CAREFUL!!! If you try to duplicate over an existing year, all you existing plans of that year will be deleted.
You will be confirmed before deleting.

245
Budget Adjustment
Budgets Adjustment
Planning Menu, Option U.
This screen allows you to adjust the funds to fit your plans. It can be increased or decreased by the percentage
or by the amount entered. You then can view the differences and decide to update the new rates or to cancel
out without making any changes.
We offer a quick backup function so you can back up before apply the new rates, and to restore right after at the
moment you apply the new rates if you accidently made a mistake. These backup and restore functions are not
meant for database backup, and they will not work on different versions of MaintStar.
-Retrieve button: select your Management Unit, then click on this button to obtain activity budgets.
-Final box: enter the final amount you want to see for all budgets to be calculated. The key here is to enter the
increase/decrease percentage number or the final number, and either to calculate all budgets evenly or calculate
only highlighted lines.
-Update W/Plan button: click on this button only if you are sure that you want to apply new working budgets and
to overwrite the existing budgets.
-Reduce: if this box is checked, the planning cost will be reduced; if not checked, it will increase.
-Run Calculation: click on this button to view the new Total Working Budgets or the Final Budgets.
-Same Percentage: enter the percentage# to increase (box unchecked) / reduce (box checked) all activities
equally (the original budgets) or highlight the specific activities to be calculated.
-Direct Input: enter amount directly into the yellow box where you want to reduce or increase amount. The
bottom Direct Input option and the top right Enter Data option have to sync.
-Priority/Multi%: goes with top direct input option. First enter your priority number in the Priority box, like 1 or 2
or 3, then setup Priority/Multi%, then run the calculation button.
-Highlight/Select Data allows you to run Calculations on the hilted lines only. Hold down Ctrl key and left click to
highlight.
-Enter Data allows you to enter the data directly to the budget yellow box, and finish it with a tab. Make sure the
Top right Enter Data is selected.
-Apply New Rates: allows you to make changes (%) right on those small boxes for Labor, Equipment, Material
rates setup, and click on Update DB button. Then to apply to the working planning, you must click on Update
W/Plan button.

246
-Select % Template allows to apply new % template without changing your template setup. Works with Update
W/Plan button.
-Activity Distribution and Text Description: if needed, you must make changes in your Activities Distribution and
text description first, then go here to apply the changes to the existing plans.
-Bottom Left Box: shows the different amount between the new working budget and original budget.
-Bottom Right Box: shows the total of the total and the bottom left box.
-Preview Button: this button is for the bottom right box. It is the total of the Entered Budgets and the difference in
the bottom left box.

247
Work Request
The MaintStar Service Request Module is a versatile, and user configurable
web-based application that allows service requests to be created and submitted.
Once submitted they can be held for review, and approved requests can be
turned into actual work orders in the MaintStar system without having to be re-
entered.
MaintStar Work request version 15 has several new changes from version 14
and earlier. This table will highlight the significant differences.
The system has been designed to serve 3 different audiences of users:
1. Internal Users - An Internal user would be an individual who works in
house for the organization. This individual can use the system as a quick
and easy way to create work requests. The Internal User might be a
maintenance staff person, a maintenance clerk, or a non-maintenance
person employed by the organization to request services from the
maintenance department.
2. External User - An External User would be an individual from outside the
organization who needs to submit a request for services. In the case of a
municipality, an external user would be a citizen from the community. The
system will allow an external user to create a user profile and log in, or
request services anonymously.
3. Administrative User - an administrative user would be an authorized
individual who sets up the configuration of the module, controls
customization of screens, and the rights of the internal and external users.
The administrative user can also view and control and create reports
about the actual requests generated in the system.
Version 14 Version 15
Work Request was a separate web- Work Requests are part of the main
based application for requesters application. Admin users access
and for internal request them seamlessly.
administration.
Requesters use web-based screen Requesters entry screen is now
to submit requests. called “The Portal”. This is scalable
and can be accessed on tablet and
Phone.

248
Request users Id and password MaintStar users can log into the
separate from MaintStar user Id request portal with their standard
and password. Requestors MaintStar ID.
Information stored in separate
tables in the request.
MaintStar requesters identity MaintStar requester information is
information is stored only in the stored in the “Customer” table and
request. user identity can be queried and
added to other work orders
Can be used with Mobile Citizen Can be used with Mobile Citizen
app app

249
WORK REQUEST
The Work Request Screen is now in MaintStar under the Work Request menu.
This screen is to be used to:
1. Enter in requests that come in by email
2. Enter requests that come in from phone calls
3. Enter requests that come in from in person or counter service.
4. Manage requests that have come in from the Portal or from Mobile Citizen
app.
1. The top part of the screen is a filter and opens and closes with the word
list. The word filter opens fields for sorting and filtering. The up and down
arrows cycle you through the list. This is used the same way as in the
work order.
2. The tabs across the top of the request:
• Details is the main request screen
• Assets can be used to add assets to the request before it is made
into a work order. Note, you can also have an asset field on the main
request screen if you want your requester to select an asset.
• Related can be used to associate other requests that are like this
one.
• Attachments is where uploaded pictures will be kept.
• Notifications can be used to set up special notices to staff about this
request.
• Log records work orders made from this request.
3. New WR creates a new request
Save Saves the request

250
Print prints the request
Create Wo turns the request into a work order
Duplicate Shows you other requests from the same location
The three-dot mini menu opens up a duplicate function and a delete
function.
The little wrench will jump you to the customization screen for the request
where you can customize the fields

251
WR SETTINGS
The Work Request setting section is used to configure your requests. The
section has 6 tabs:
• Wr Control
• Operations
• Groups
• Portal Settings
• Status
• Customer Type
The WR Control screen
The Wr. id pattern can be set as shown Examples: WR0 -> WR00000001, WR#
-> WR1, WR{YY}0 -> WR20000001.
Last Wr. No. controls the starting number. This is helpful if you are coming from
another system and want to carry numbers forward.
The template drop-downs link to email templates for password recovery and
Creation notices. The templates themselves are created in the
Setup>Notification Template Section.
The desktop section has default settings for State, city, and promised date.
The default group is important if you are allowing users to self-register. This
determines which user group they will be defaulted to.
The allow Anonymous checkbox controls whether the portal will allow users to
submit requests with out registering for an account.

252
The Operations Tab
The Operation tab holds 3 levels of choices for your requestors to choose from.
You must use the operation level. The second and third level are up to you.
These levels of choices make it easy for your audience to categorize their issue
so that you get reliable actionable information. These categories also allow
reporting by category. The Operation level is typically configured to be a list of
“Departments” or Operations” in your agency. Examples would be: Facilities,
Fleet, Water, Streets and Roads, etc. In a manufacturing environment,
operations might be different manufacturing areas in your plant.
The response they give to the first tier, or complaint question will determine
which set of questions they see in the second tier or problem.
Example: If your organization was a facility maintenance group you might create
the first tier of questions (complaint) something like this:
First Tier “Operations”
The requestor chooses Facilities at the operation level
Facilities
Graffiti
Streets
Water
Second tier of “Issues”
The requestor selects plumbing from the facilities options at the second level.
HVAC
Plumbing
Electrical
Room furnishing
If the requestor chose Plumbing, the Third Tier of “Issue details” might be:
Leaking Sink
Clogged Sink
No Hot Water
Toilet Clogged
When they make these selections, their responses are stored in the request and
will transfer to the work order. They can still add an additional comment into the
complaint box if they want to.

253
Click add to add a new operation. Click edit to edit an existing line.
• Name and Description Use a name for the operation level that your
audience will understand, especially if your request will be open to the
general public.
• Notify users -Select one or more names from your user dropdown for staff
who should be notified when a request for this operation level comes in.
• Workgroup Select the workgroup that should get a work order made for
this operation code.
• Printout Select a printout form for the requests that come from this
operation.
• Allow public Requests This checkbox controls if this operation is shown on
the portal.
• Customize links you to the screen to make customizations for this
operation code on the screen.
• Added by Added date Who added this entry and the date it was added.
• Updated by Updated date Who updated this entry and the date it was
updated.
The second level called Issue (was called complaint in version 14) is developed
by clicking on the operation first. Each operation level code has its own
secondary issue list.
The issues are developed in the same way as the operation level.

254
The third level is issue detail. This level gives you more granularity to your
responses. This level does not have the option to route to internal staff with
email notifications. It is built the same way as the issue is built. Click on an
issue to add issue detail as a third level.

255
Groups tab
The groups tab allows you to create groups of users. Click new group to create
a group. Each group can be controlled for:
• Which users belong in each group
• Which operation codes each group should see
• What notifications each group should get.
Here is an example:
For a municipality, you will have several groups. Let’s say you have one for
general staff. These requestors could ask for services for all operation level
choices, so you add all operation codes to this group.
You also are opening the system to the general public. You would want
operations for road issues, graffiti and other municipal services activated but
you would not want facilities or fleet available to the public only internal staff.
Groups screen
Groups > Operations
The operations tab lists the operations this group will see, Add button adds
additional operation to the group. The check mark on the left will select an

256
operation to delete.
Groups>Notification Setups
The Email Notifications are configured here. The blue checkbox activates the
email notice. You must have a template specified for each notification event.
The blue box on the right of each template will jump you to the template setup
screen.

257
Portal Settings Tab
The Portal is a Simplified set of screens intended for users to use to submit
requests. Users can access the portal without having access to the rest of
MaintStar. Most agencies will have one portal for their requesters to use. It is
however possible to have more than one portal configured for different users.
You may want a portal configured for a DMZ for an additional layer of security.
The table at the top of the screen is a list of your available portals. These are
not user configurable. Please contact MaintStar support for assistance if you
wish to add additional portals to your system.
The details about the selected portal are shown below the table.
• The URL link is shown for the portal. You can copy this link to distribute to
your users.
• Portal Description is a label for the portal.
• The default group is selected next. If you allow your users to self-register,
they will be automatically added to the default group.
• Default state, city and phone can be set here.
• The checkbox for anonymous will allow users to submit requests without
registering their contact information.
• The allow registration checkbox allows new users to self-register. They will
be added to the default user group.
• The Accept requests from Mobile citizen checkbox is used for customers
with the mobile citizen application.

258
• Captcha enable is for future development.
• Send Survey is for future development
• Duplicate checking can be set for proximity.
Status Tab
Statuses for the request can be configured on this tab.
The system has 4 internal system statuses:
• New -New request, no action taken
• In work – Work Order has been made from this request
• Done (closed) – Work request is closed either manually or automatically
from work order being closed)
• Denied (closed)- Work Request closed from the request being denied.

259
Customer type
The customer type allows you to create categories for customers. Customer
type is a field on the request screen used to categorize different types of
requesters such ad telephone, email, walk- in or portal, etc.

260
Customers
The Customers table holds all requesters. People who self-register to use the
system are stored here. MaintStar users who log into the request portal from
their MaintStar ID are copied over to this table, and users you create manually
are created here.
The filter section at the top of the screen is the list of all customers. It can be
filtered as we do work orders and other tables in the system.
A selected user (blue highlight) is displayed in detail at the bottom of the screen.

261
The customer table is used in many sections of the system for many different
things. In the request the Key parts of the record are:
• Customer ID - Unique identifier. This is used when the person logs in to
the request
• Customer Name - First and last name
• Username – MaintStar user name (filled in for MaintStar users who sign
into the request portal)
• Phone
• Email
Checkboxes:
• Notify via email – send notices to MaintStar notifications.
• By external email – send notices to email address in profile.
• Notify by text – send notices by SMS text message to phone in cell phone
in profile.
• Internal user – denotes this person is a MaintStar system user.
• Banned – used to block a user from submitting requests.
Work Request tab lists Requests this user has submitted.

262
Portal
The Portal is brand new to version 15. It is a simpler web interface designed for
your requestors to use to submit their requests. The Portal has its own URL
address. Most agencies will have one portal, but it is possible to set up more
than one. You might want a second if you want one set up for the DMZ security
reasons. The portal can be viewed on a tablet, phone or desktop screen. The
screen will automatically adjust the screen based on the device.
1. Request list – Shows list of either my requests or all requests by tab
selection. Blue Id link will open the detail of each request. Requests
are color coded for status. The Small funnel at the top of the list
opens a filter to show open, closed or both status. It also lets you
filter for a operation type.
2. Start a new request with the “Add a new request button”.
3. Map Will show location of requests that were geo tagged. If your
phone or tablet has location services activated your location will be
stored on the map when you submit requests. Those requests with
this map information are notated with the black pinpoint icon in the
first column of the list.

263
4. Map Icon will display or close the map.
5. Tab to show
a. my requests (ones you have made)
b. Tagged requests (Ones you have checked tag box, to keep
your eye on)
c. All Requests – show all requests from all users (May be
security controlled for different user groups to show or not
show
6. Menu to change your user information, add a new request or logout
Entry screen
First select an Operation code and then an issue. Depending on configuration
there may be a third level “Issue details: These will be checkboxes. Red Star
denotes a required field
The next screen is the primary request screen. It will vary according to the
screen customization. It stares your identity, location and text description of the
issue.
At the bottom of the screen you can attach photos or files to the request. These
will transfer to the work order. If you are using a phone or camera you can take
pictures and attach them to the request.
The final step is to submit the request.

264

265
The request is now submitted for processing.
The Request will now appear in the Request section of the MaintStar
application

266
MaintStar Mobile
MaintStar Mobile is a web-based application designed for you to manage your
work orders on a phone or tablet when you cannot be at your desktop. It can be
used on an Apple or Android device. A tablet gives you more screen space
making data and maps easier to see and use. A tablet will not fit in your pocket
but can be carried like a book. A tablet will also have a larger battery so the
device can go longer between charges. A phone is of course smaller. The
smaller screen makes text smaller on the screen to read and buttons more
difficult to click precisely. You trade these shortcomings in a phone for the
convenience of a device you can put in your pocket. It you are not tech savvy
and have trouble clicking on a screen then the tablet will probably be easier for
you. Whichever device you choose, the MaintStar mobile application will work
with you throughout the day. We will use an Apple iPhone 8+ with the default
Safari browser in this example. We will also show what the app looks like on a
tablet for comparison.
The MaintStar Mobile Work Order will allow remote workers to access their
assigned work order in the field. Key features of the Mobile work order are:
• The Mobile Work Order is easy to use.
• Users can view their work orders on Android and iOS tablets and phones
through a cellular connection.
• The system will leverage your GIS map services
o You can view work orders on the G.I.S. map.
o You can add assets to the work order from your GIS map layers or
from searchable drop downs.
o You can view asset history from the map.
o You can markup the map to show work areas.
• We seamlessly integrate your camera to take pictures and add them to
the Work Order.
• Users will be able to add work detail, hours, parts and materials,
contractor information and other closing information.
• They will be able to close the work orders in the field.
• If they will be traveling to areas where cell reception is spotty, the system
will allow then do download their work orders to the device while they
have cell service. They will also be able to download selected assets,
and work in ‘Disconnected” mode when they travel to no reception areas.
When they later reenter cell service area, their device will sync back to the
server.

267
Log on
Enter Your User Id and Password and Select your Work
Group
Enter your Id and password
Select the ‘Profile’ you want to log into from the
drop down. You may have only one profile, or you
will have more than one if you have a production
and a test environment for example.
When you enter your ID and password on a
phone or tablet, be aware that most devices will
try to capitalize the first letter. If your password is
all lower case, you will need to shift to lower case
before you type the first letter.
Press ‘Login”. You will be taken to the Home
Screen.

268
Allow your device to use your
location
Your device will ask you if you want to use your
current location. You should always allow this. Using
the location services of the device will allow the map
to know where you are geographically. If you
accidentally click don’t allow, you should close the
app and start it again as this is the only time the
location service can be activated.
App and data will update and sync. This may take a
minute or two depending on the size of the database.
You can manually update the data manually if
needed.
The app will take you to the last screen you were on when you closed out last
time. It will download all the open work orders assigned to you.
In this example we are starting with an overview of the screens.

269
This is the Main Menu Screen
.
Across the Top Blue bar, the three icons are
• “Hamburger menu”
• Filter
• Map

270
The large Main Menu section:
• Work Orders takes you to the work orders section. There you can
see work orders in a table view and on the map. You can edit them
and create new work orders. This will be the main section that users
will work in. The Work Orders menu shows a number in a circle.
That is the number of work orders downloaded for you when you
logged on.
• Work orders assigned to you will be loaded when you log on. The
system looks for your ID in the
• ‘Assigned to field’,
• The Crew Leader Field,’
• The supervisor field and as
• ‘Labor’ on the LEM section.
• Create Work Order is a direct link to a new work order entry. This is
available from the Work order section with a green circle with a plus
sign in it also.
• Work Planning Entry allows you to create work plan entries that are
either not connected to a work order, and ones connected to a work
order. If the entries for time and materials etc. are going to a work
order, you should add then to the work order directly as there will
likely be other detail for you to fill in on the work order beside LEM.
• User settings shows information about your ID. It gives you a selection of
a light or dark theme and the selection to pull data on-line or Pre-load
them.
• About the app shows version number and contact info.
• Log out is how you log off the application.

271
The Hamburger Menu
in the upper left
corner, opens the following slide out screen:
• It shows your log on ID.
• You will see the Work group you are in. If
you have access to different workgroups
you can change to a different workgroup
here, in the drop down.
• Other menu items are the same as on the
home screen except for the refresh.
• This icon in the blue header bar
is Refresh. Click it.
• The menu item ‘Refresh’ will open the
refresh panel.
The green dot shows that your data is synced, meaning what you
have entered on your device has been uploaded back to the server.
You can reload your work orders if necessary, with the reload
button.
Sync will sync your entries to the server manually. Normally the
system will sync date automatically.

272
Work Orders
Work orders assigned to you will be loaded when you log
on. The system looks for your ID in the
• ‘Assigned to’ field,
• The ‘Crew Leader’ Field,’
• The ‘supervisor’ field or as
• ‘Labor’ on the LEM section.
When you click on this menu item the list of work orders
will open.

273
‘The Map Icon will open
the Map screen.
If the work orders have
GIS Assets in them,
then the first asset in
each one will be shown
on the map with a
wrench icon. If you tap
on one of the icons the
id of the asset will be
shown. Open Work
Orders will be red
Closed ones will be
Gray. You can pinch to
zoom in and out. Close
the Map with the left x
in the corner to go back
to the work order list.

274
The Work Order List Views
The work order list has two Icons in the upper right
corner. The one on the left changes the list view
and the one on the right is used to filter the list.
There are two ways to see the list of work orders.
They can be shown in a condensed list view or in a
more expanded list view. The default is the expanded
view. Choose which ever display works best for you.
The condensed list view shows the work orders in a
scrollable table, 10 items to a page. Each work order
takes up just one line. The condensed list view can be
scrolled left to right to see more information. Clicking
on the work order number opens the specific work
order.
Expanded list view
The expanded list view displays the work orders
according to the settings in the filter and grouping. The
system will remember the way you had them set last
and opens the way you left them. Closed work orders
have a solid folder icon, open ones, white.
A paper clip indicates an attachment.
The pinpoint teardrop indicates one or more mapped
asset.
The expanded view shows you a few essential things
about the work order in a small card without scrolling left
or right.
Click the right pointing arrow on the right side of the card
for the work order you want to open in detail.

275
The Filter
The filter has two functions, to
filter the work orders that are
displayed and a control the
grouping. The tabs at the top
are used to switch between
these two functions.
Wo #, status, priority and
assigned to, are choices. If you
click ‘Show More’ you will see
many more fields to select
from.
Click ‘Search’ to change the
displayed Work orders to ones
that meet this selection.
‘Save as’ is useful if you have a filter selection you want to use many times. You
can give it a name and find it in the ‘Saved search’ drop down.
‘Clear all’ resets the filter.
Group By has several choices to group your results.
You can select
• No Grouping,
• Grouping By:
o Status,
o Crew Leader ID,
o Priority,
o Assigned to ID, or by
o Issue date.

276
The Work Order Screen
Click on a work order number to open the work order in detail.
Across the top of the Work Order
screen are four Icons.
• Details - is the main Work
Order Information view
• Job Site - is a place you can
record an address of where
the work is done.
• Request info – If the work order
came from a request, the
requestors contact information
will be here.
• Attach -This is where photos
and other attachments are
stored. Yes, you can take
pictures with your phone or
tablet and attach them to the
Work Order! You will see a
number indicating how many
attachments there are.
The Work Order Detail screen is
divided into sections. The example below shows these panels in their
condensed state. Each one has a small arrow in the upper left. These arrows
allow you to open a section up or condense it.
The arrow head points down when the sectionis condensed, and it points up
when it is expanded.
The top section is the header. It holds general information about the work order.
Below that is the section for assets.
Next is the LEM section where Labor, Equipment Materials and Work Quantity
are entered.

277
Starting a new Work Order
You can start a new Work order from the main menu “Create Work order or with
the green plus sign on any existing work order.

278
Filling in the New Work Order – Header section
The new work order will be started. You will see the header section. Complete
the fields such as work order type, add priority and assignments for assignee,
crew leader and supervisor if you use these designations. Enter a short
description of the work to be performed in the wo description field.
Click Save at the bottom of the screen. You can now condense the header
section if you wish with the up arrow at the top of the header section. This is up
to you. There is nothing wrong with leaving it expanded, you will just have to
scroll to get to the asset section below it. We would however suggest that if you
expand only one section at a time, you might find it easier to navigate and less
confusing.
You can talk your entries into text fields
Phones and tablets have great
speech to text capabilities.
When you click into a text field
the keyboard will pop up. If you
click the microphone, you can
talk your entry in and have
almost no typing necessary!

279
Standard Layout
The Asset Section –
The asset section can be opened with the
up/down arrow on the left. If your work group
is set up for the Standard Work Order Form,
there will be one asset added by default.
It has the ID of “Unknown” In the Standard
work order format each asset has its own
Labor, Equipment and Material. You can add
labor to the Unknown asset. It is however
intended that once you begin the service you
will at some point determine the asset
involved and change the Id from Unknown to
the correct Asset ID. To change the ID from
‘Unknown’ to an actual asset Click the 3 dots
on the right of the asset ID. In the drop down
choose ‘edit.’

280
You will go to a search screen.
Here you can select the asset
you need from the asset drop
down or search for it with
specific fields. To search click
the magnifying glass. In the
search screen put in one or
more criteria then click search.
Select from the Search Results
You will see a list of matches for your criteria. Tap on
the right one to select. It will be added to your work
order.

281
Infrastructure Layout
Asset Section –
If your workgroup has been configured for the Infrastructure layout. Your asset
section will be a little different than the Standard layout design. The Assets will
be in a table where multiple assets can be listed. The assets will have ONE
section for LEM, Labor, Equipment and Materials. This means that the work
order is capturing the cost for “the entire” work order as a whole job. The
Standard Work Order Layout has a separate LEM section for each asset.
In the following example we will switch to a water work order and add some
hydrants from the GIS map instead of the asset search.
Adding Assets from the Map
Your GIS assets can be
selected from the map and
added to your work order. To
do this, start a new work
order with the green plus
button at the bottom of the
work order screen. Then
open the Map with the map
icon in the upper right corner
of the screen.
The Map will appear full
screen. Note when you want
to go back to the work order,
use the blue back arrow at
the bottom of the screen or
the white X in the upper right
corner.

282
Note: If you are using a tablet you have the advantage of a screen that is big
enough to be able to show the work order and the map at the same time. On a
phone, you must open the map to see the map then close it to go back to the
work order screen.
TABLET VIEW – See the map and Work Order side by side.

283
Click the configuration Icon which looks like a gear.
The configuration has two radio buttons labeled On-Line and Pre-Loaded.
The On-Line selection will pull assets to the map over your internet connection.
This is the normal way to work. If you anticipate working in an area where there
is little or no internet connection you can use the pre-loaded function to
download asset types you will be working with, while you have internet
connection. They will be stored on the device memory. Because of this, you
will be able to work with these assets and add them to work orders where you
do not have good internet connection.
In this example we will use the pre-loaded
connection method.
The Active Layer dropdown needs to be set for the
asset type that you want to select on the map.
Here we have it set for ‘wHydrants ‘, meaning water
hydrants.
You can have many layers visible in the Layers
Visibility section, but you must choose which layer
to select from in the Active layer.
When the active layer is set, close the panel by
swiping it right

284
You will be taken back to the map screen. You will see the work Order that you
are on at the top. Below that is the active layer listed at the top of the screen. If
you are at the location, you are going to be working at you can tap the Center
Icon in the lower right. The screen will
zoom to your location. You must have
location services turned on and active in
the device for this to work. If you are not
there you can pinch and zoom the map to
move to the location, you need. You will
need to zoom in close to see the icons for
the hydrants. In a GIS map, fine detail
such as asset icons do not appear when
you are zoomed at a high elevation.
Select the asset by clicking on it. It will
then be in the box at the bottom of the
screen.
If you click it there you will see it
highlighted in green on the map to make
sure you have the right one.
The x will remove the asset from the
selection box. The plus sign will add it to
the work order.
If you added it by mistake, click the plus
sign again. You will see a green check
indicting that it has been added. Click the
plus sign again at it will show a garbage can. Click the garbage can to delete
the asset.
When it is added the Hydrant Icon will display a number 1, meaning the first
asset added to the work order. If you need to add more than one hydrant, keep
the map screen open and select other hydrants in the same manner. They will
each be added to the work order with the plus sign.
You can come back to the map from the work order to add assets again.

285
Working with Assets
All assets that are on the work order (which came from the map) are shown in
the map view for the work order you have opened.
NEW CONCEPT: In version 15, each asset has a check box labeled ‘Done’.
This check box can be checked with a green check indicating that this asset is
finished. The corresponding dot on the map will change from a blue dot to a
green dot to show that it is done.
The +/- sign to the right of the check box expands and contracts the asset line
itself for one asset.
NEW CONCEPT: When the asset is expanded there is
a new feature called ‘Predefined Task’.
This feature will allow you to do many things:
Tasks will allow you to create a list of specific tasks, and
the user can mark off which tasks are completed and
when they were completed.
Tasks can also be set up for recording information,
observations, conditions, and measurements.

286
Completing the Task
When a task is completed you should check the done checkbox on the task.
You can add notes or other comments if needed. The system will automatically
record the date and time the task was done.
Once all tasks for that Asset are marked done, the system will check the asset
Done box for you automatically.

287
L.E.M.
LEM stands for Labor, Equipment and
Materials. L.E.M. It is another section of the
work order after assets. It can be expanded
and condensed like the other sections.
To view the labor and equipment and
materials expand the section.
You will see a list of all the Equipment
Materials and labor currently on the work
order.
• The category of each one is the first
column.
• The second column is the identity of
each entry. This column can be
expanded by clicking on the ID.
• The third column is the quantity as a
count or hours.
• The last column is the date
Click on a LEM entry to open it in full screen
detail. There you can enter hours, pay type,
Management Unit and Activity.

288
2 ways to display LEM Entries
In the setup of the
system on the desktop
there is a switch to
control how LEM
entries are entered on
the Mobile.
In the Workgroup set
up screen in Security,
the work order control
tab lets you change
how your mobile app
behaves.
In the work group set up the three check boxes
1. Turn the map on or off
2. Show or not show tasks
3. Change the LEM entry to be either
a. A horizontal grid which scrolls
horizontally. You can enter LEM info
directly in the grid.
b. A grid that displays entered data, but
when you click to add a new row, a full
screen opens for you to make the
entry.
It is up to you which display method you prefer.
The grid entry might be convenient, but it does
mean you will be scrolling left and right a lot, and
entries directly into the table are more difficult on a
small screen phone.
The full screen entry gives you more space to
make your LEM entries, but you will be opening the
full screen for each entry then going back to the grid when you save.

289
Adding a new LEM entry
Click the Add LEM button.
The entry screen will appear. First
entry is the type: labor, equipment,
contractor, misc., work quantity, or
crew. You must make this selection
first, as other fields in the line will
change depending on this first entry
type selection. In this example we
will add labor.
The next lines add – activity,
management unit, the ID of the
craftsman, hours, and minutes, pay
type account number, date, location,
and charge method.
NOTE: The Management unit and activity codes are now on the labor lines.
This means you can now have a work
order with multiple management units
and Activities. Once you set the Mgt
Unit and Activity, the values you
select will be automatically carried to
the next entries.
Choose the entry values by double
clicking on each line. Use the
magnifying glass for the craftsman ID
Save when you are done.

290
Adding Attachments
You can use your phone or tablet to add pictures you
take in the field.
In the attachment section, click the add attachment
button.
There you can select a file already on your device or
take a new picture. New picture will open your device
camera and take the picture.
Click use photo. After the photo is taken.
Here you see the Photo attached to the work order.

291
Closing a work order
When you are ready to close the
Work Order click on the 3 dot
menu on the right top corner of
the details screen.
There will be a fly out menu
giving a choice of deleting the
work order and closing.
The delete option will not be
functional unless you have
delete rights.
To close the work order, choose
‘close’.

292
The system will ask you to confirm that you want
to close.
At this point the system will close the work order.
And the status will be changed to ‘closed’
Closing conditions are honored
Please note that the mobile app will honor any
closing conditions that have been set for this
workgroup.
This means if your administrator has specified
that certain fields must be filled in for the work
order to close. Here is an example of a work
order that had a part entered but the part is from
a controlled warehouse that must make an issue
transaction for the inventory part before the work
order can be closed.
In this case the part has not yet been issued to
the work order so the work order cannot be
closed.

293
Actual entry
The actual entry section is for making Work Planning entries. This function was
previously available only on the desktop. You can now make work planning
entries in the field on your portable device.
On the Actual entry screen, you see several
blue buttons. Click Add New to start and
entry.
. Entry screen
This is like the desktop entry.
You first select type of entry
• Labor
• Equipment
• Material
• Contractor
• Miscellaneous
• Or Work Quantity.
After type you then select the ID for the entry
such as technicians Id.
Other fields will then vary according to the
type of entry selected, such as pay type, hours
management unit, activity etc. This is very much like the LEM entry on a
workorder. Click save then you have the entry completed
Disconnected Mode
In process……..

294
MaintStar Reporting Module
MaintStar offers Report and Query as part of the Reporting module. These 2 menus will allow the ability to report
either by preset reports or ad hoc reporting.
MAINTSTAR 15
Concepts and Distinctions
QUICK REPORTING
MaintStar 15 now introduces the concepts of reports and printouts. The terminologies are as followed:
- Reports: a report is a simple list of results which mostly shows records and some basic information of
the records. A report often deals with many records (sometimes hundreds of thousands) and isn’t heavy
on design and layout.
- Printouts: a printout is a heavily formatted and designed form meant to output many specific details on a
GUIDE
single or multiple selected record. A printout often only works if a specific information is given (a single
Purchase Order number, a single Transaction number, a single Work Order number, etc.), and without
that information the printout probably will return with “NO DATA.”
- Reports are more general, and the main purpose of running them is just to get information about records
listed in a grid for easy viewing and analyzing data. Printouts are specific, and the main purpose of
running them is to collect general to sensitive information a single or multiple selected record while
Quick explanations on getting
formatting them in a particular manner. Both can use parameters to filter their results.
- Known modules which use printouts to print their records are: Purchase Order (Regular, Requisition,
Blanket, Quotation), Inventory Transactions (Receiving and Issuing), Inventory Summary (for single
started with MaintStar 15,
inventory item), Work Request, Work Order, and PM (to some extend).
Reporting.
(Report example, a simple grid listing only records and some information about the records without any
MaintStar
special formatting.)
28 Hammond Phone: 800-255-5675
Irvine California 92618 Email: WWW://Maintstar.com

295
(Printout example, a dense, heavily formatted form which shows only information regarding a single Work
Order number, WA20000287.)
- Query has no printout since its purpose is for ad-hoc reporting.

296
Setups and Requirements
Reports have “Report Category” to setup certain categories for the purpose of making a report usable in other
modules (as a printout) or simply for filtering purposes (as simple reports).
- Visit Setup > Table >> Report Category to add more categories. *Some categories are defined by
MaintStar (like Printout:Work Order) and cannot be edited since some modules use those particular
categories for printout.
o Editing them risks breaking the application, making the printout usable only in Reports module
and nowhere else.
o The syntax of naming printout is “Printout:<name_of_printout_type>”. Avoid naming a category
in such way.
- A Report entry is NOT usable unless you upload a Jasper report (in the form of a jrxml file) and generate
a Resource ID for it. After clicking to create a new report entry, you basically create a “Shell”
to later hold the actual report after loading. Visit Uploading Report for more information.
Similar to Reports, Query also has its own “Query Category” table to create categories for queries. Unlike
Reports, Query has no printout since its for ad-hoc reporting so there isn’t any specific query category to look out
for.
To make reporting simpler, we encourage users to use a browser add-on called PDF Viewer. This add-on is free
and is meant to help viewing the report result as a pdf and giving printing option on the go.
- This helps reduce the amount of downloaded pdf by not downloading any pdf. Any generated pdf will
only open a new browser tab and be shown.
- This helps eliminate the time wasting to find where the pdf is downloaded

297
Reports
Reports allows the usage of Jasper reports. User can upload and download any of the available reports. There
are several requirements you need to know before using this module:
- A report can only run IF you’ve uploaded a Jasper jrxml source file. If you haven’t, you’ll be greeted with
this error:
- By clicking the (upload) button, you can upload the jrxml source file. After doing so, the report will
be ready to run.
- The “Upload” functionality will perform some update and setup on Jasper Server to enable the report
usable. Simply editing the Resource ID won’t enable the report runnable (in case someone manually
update the Resource ID).
- “Report Category” is very important for certain reports. For example, Work Order Printout cannot work
without a report with the Report Category set to “Work Order Printout.” A normal report doesn’t need
Report Category, but for a printout
- All Resource ID MUST be unique, that also include the resource of the sub-reports: this means all report
files (jrxml files) must have unique names.
- Please make sure your report is working before uploading. Error can occur if your report fails.
2. Reporting > Reports > Report Details:
You can view basic information about a report as well as information about when the report was published and
its publisher. Resource ID is an ID linked to the Jasper Server; without this ID, the report is unusable.

298
- The only way to populate the Resource ID is to publish (Upload) a Jasper Report via uploading a “jrxml”
file.
- When you create a new report, you’re simply creating a “Shell” entry to later hold the actual report (after
Upload).
- After Upload, you have access to all of these functions:
- Save: save any changes to the report information. “Upload” automatically updates the Resource ID, so
there’s no need to save again after an upload.
- Run Report: this will run and download the report (as PDF) directly to your computer. Depending on the
size of the report, this can perform instantly in a few seconds or take a while.
- Run Background: this will run the report in the background and generate a link for you to download it
later. If you know a report will take long to run, performing a Run Background to generate a link for later
download and viewing is much more preferred.
- Preview: this will open a new tab on the browser and generate an html page to show the report output.
Bigger report can possibly fail to open depending on the size of it or the limit the browser enforces.
- Upload : upload a jrxml report file. This will generate a Resource ID so the report can be runnable.
More information about Upload process can be found in Uploading Reports.
- Download : this will let you download the jrxml file of the report. You have the option to download
only the main report’s jrxml, or all of the files including dependencies (like sub-reports jrxml) as a Zip.
More information about Upload process can be found in Uploading Reports.
- “More” : this will give you 3 options to either setup the report’s security, schedule a report, or delete
a report. More information about reporting’s security and scheduling can be found in Common
Securities.
3. Reporting > Reports > Edit Parameters:

299
- You can view and edit what parameters the report has. You cannot add or delete any parameters since
it’ll disable the report due to the difference between the uploaded report and the front-end processing.
- You can change the label of the parameter; this will only affect the labelling on front-end when you try to
run the report with parameters.
o You cannot change the Default Name since that’s the name of the parameter the report’s using.
o You can edit the description for better understanding of the parameter.
- You can edit which parameters are required. A required parameter doesn’t mean that a report will not
run without the parameter, it just means the report might not return any result if the parameter is not
supplied.
- Some parameters can be defaulted to have a value. If set, every time you run the report (if you don’t
specify any other parameter), the report can run with the defaulted value.
- Collection-type parameters are parameters that can take multiple inputs. These are not default-able.
You can only use them by running the report from Reporting > Reports > Report Details screen.
4. Reporting > Reports > SubReports:
- You can only edit the description of a sub report. This can help with identifying and understanding what
the sub report can do.
- A sub-report is a smaller report within the main report (report within a report). Often time, a sub-report
performs a different linkage to another database’s table to get more information and formatting that
normally cannot be or very difficult to be done by the main report alone. These sub-reports help
developing a complex report much better by breaking down sizable parts of the reports into individual
smaller combinable reports.
5. Uploading Reports:
- When clicking “Upload” from Reporting > Reports > Report Details, you’ll be greeted with this popup:
- Clicking “Choose File” here let you choose your jrxml file to upload as the main report. Once done
selecting, click “Upload” and wait a few seconds for the application to process and generate a Resource
ID for the report entry, making the report usable.

300
- Before clicking “Upload” but after “Choose File” for the Main JRXML File, you’ll be provided with the next
optional step:
- If the report has any dependencies (sub-reports), you can choose here and upload. If a main report
requires sub-report(s) to operate and you miss uploading them, you can get an error and the report
remains unusable even if a Resource ID is generated.
- JRXML files MUST have unique names across the system. This helps prevent overwriting existing
reports that other users might’ve uploaded. You can still overwrite a report by re-uploading a JRXML file
of the same or different name in the same “Shell” entry.
- If a report has sub-reports attached to it, re-uploading still requires both the main and sub-report(s) to be
uploaded.

301
Query
Query allows you to create your own reports via view selections which shows the tables and columns.
6. Reporting > Query > Overview:
- You can edit basic information about the query.
- Unlike reporting, the owner field is not editable. You cannot change ownership of a query.
- The buttons allow you to move between tabs, just like how MaintStar14 used to do.
- Of course, if you already know what you need, you can access a tab directly by clicking it without using
left/right buttons.
- Upon adding a new query, the report is named UNTITLED_<query’s ID>. You can change this name
later.
- “RUN QUERY” will give you up to 4 options to view the result of the query: view direct result (sending
you directly to the Result tab to view the result), direct download a CSV file for the result, direct
download a PDF report file (Jasper format) for the result, or direct download the JRXML source file
(Jasper) of the result.
- “More” : this will give you 3 options to either setup the query’s security, schedule the query, or
change the layout of the query (Jasper format). More information about query’s security and scheduling
can be found in Common Securities.

302
7. Reporting > Query > View Selection:
You can create a query through a default selection of a table/view and its columns OR create a custom
query if you know how to work with SQL statement.
::View Selection > Tables:
- Upon adding a new query, this will be the screen you’re defaulted into.
- You can immediately select a view to start making a query out of.
- Views can either be an actual table listing or MaintStar custom views. You can filter the “Family” for the
view to get only views/tables which they belong to.
- Contact MaintStar if you have any question regarding available views, missing views, or requesting
more views.
- We suggest everyone to use tables/views from “Default Query” Family as a starting point since they join
multiple database tables and the work order table together.
:

303
:View Selection > Custom Query:
- When you select Customer Query to create a query, your Condition and Sorting tabs are disabled.
- You can still get accessed to Columns tab to edit labelling.
- After writing a custom SQL, click “Validate Query.” If successful, click “Save” and proceed.
8. Reporting > Query > Columns:
- You MUST select a view or table to get any column result. If you performed a “Tables” selection, you
can select columns. If you performed a “Custom Query,” you can only view or edit the labels for the
column selected from the SQL.
- You can select/deselect any column name by just clicking the row.
- You can filter the column name, label or comment to check if the view or table has the column(s) you
need.
- “More”: you can create a computer column, edit header and footer (for Jasper PDF printing) or edit
column settings.
::

304
Create Computed Column:
- You can create your own column in addition to the columns you’ve already selected.
- The procedure to create a computed column is as followed:
o Give the computed column a name, any name is fine, as long as it’s not conflicting with any
name from the columns in the table. The name is not editable once committed.
o Give the computed column a formula. The formula usually involves an existing table’s column
and some sort of calculation being done on it. When writing down the name of the table’s
column, you MUST include the “tb.” Keyword before the column name, in this syntax:
‘tb.<column_name>’.
o Then, give the column a data type. The data type can be a String, Number, Date or Currency
($).
o You can perform sorting and grouping on the computed column. You CANNOT perform any
condition to a computed column, however.
:

305
:Edit Column Setting:
- You can edit the column width and column label. You can also relabel the computed column as well.
- You can click (Drag-n-Drop) to reorganize the position of the column. You reorganize the column by
placing them up or down. On the output of the report, the column will show from left to right. This means
the top row here represents the first column starting from the left of the report.
- You can set a column’s width = 0 to hide it from the report printout WHILE keeping the column visible on
front-end.
::Edit Header and Footer:
- You can edit the Header and Footer of the query so your result can have a name and a footer.
- Normally, a query will take its name as the default header, but you can overwrite that name with this
header field.

306
9. Reporting > Query > Condition:
- You can select condition for the columns from the table/view you’ve selected back in Reporting > Query
> View Selection.
- The columns being conditioning on are not limited to just what you selected bac in Reporting > Query >
Columns. Valid columns are columns coming from the selected view.
- You cannot perform conditioning on a computed column.
- If “Custom Expression” is used, it’ll ignore the main column conditioning (“Column Name” and whatever
operation you’re performing on the column) and use the expression instead.
- If you selected “Custom Query” in Reporting > Query > View Selection, you will not have access to this
tab.
::Map Abilities:
- Query can be used in combination with map.
- Query can only show the location of assets on the map.
- To show assets on the map, you MUST select a table/view which contains both of
these columns: asset_id and asset_type. Then, you MUST select both of those
columns, then a map coordinate will automatically be outputted.
- You can also select assets from map and paste them into the query’s condition.
- Again, in order to interact with map, you MUST select asset_id and asset_type
columns.

307
10. Reporting > Query > Sorting & Grouping:
- After applying conditioning, you get to sort or group by the columns.
- Unlike Conditions where you get to select any column as long as the column exists in the table/view
you’ve selected, Sorting & Grouping ONLY allows columns you’ve selected back in Columns tab.
- If you selected “Custom Query” in Reporting > Query > View Selection, you will not have access to this
tab.
11. Reporting > Query > Result:
- You can view your result from the query here.
- At this stage, you can still edit your header and footer or basic column settings like labelling or sizing
(again, changing column width won’t affect front-end result, just the printout).
- You can download the result in CSV, PDF or JRXML format.
- If you selected asset_id and asset_type as columns, you can check out map to see if your assets’
coordinates are shown.

308
Common Securities
Common securities are settings that both Report and Query have which are similar. The connection between
Report and Query (JRXML) will be briefly explained in Report and Query Integration.
12. Scheduler:
- Scheduler allows you to schedule the run of a report.
- You can schedule base on frequency of day, week or month.
- “Recipient” is currently being tested and developed. This can allow you to share the result of the
scheduled run to specific people.
13. Security Sharing:
- You can edit the sharing right of a report or query separately.
- “Share Type” let you choose what kind of sharing will be made: By User, Workgroup, or shared to
Everyone. By default, the report or query is only viewable by the owner (which is the maker of the report
or query).
- “Share With” changes depending on the “Share Type.” You can select specific individuals if you choose
to share By User, or you can select specific workgroups if you choose to share By Workgroup.

309
- “Rights” is either Read or Read/Write. Whoever gets access to the report or query gets to either read
(only) or edit it as well.
14. Report and Query Integration:
- Since query can output a JRXML file, you can use that file as your starting point to make your own
personal printout or report.
- You can use Jaspersoft Studio (3rd Party Software) to edit the JRXML report.
- Afterward, you can then create a “Shell” entry in Report module, then upload your JRXML generated
and edited from your query output. You just made a Jasper report, and potentially a new printout layout,
for MaintStar15.
- You can practice this procedure of using query to make jrxml files for report instead of making your own
jrxml from scratch.
15. Query Example (Step by Step):
::Step 1 (Make new Query):
- Now that we have a bit of understanding in both Report and Query, let’s make a sample query using the
steps described in Query.
- Start out by clicking “CREATE QUERY”
- By default, your query will be “UNTITLED (id)”, don’t worry about it as you can change it later or
overwrite this name with the Header edit.
::Step 2 (Select a View or Table):
- You’ll then get started at the View Selection tab. You can immediately select any view you like. For this
example, we’d want to select the table/view with a list of assets. We can go with Family “Default Query,”
then select “q_wo_asset” which includes Work Order numbers and assets related to that Work Order.

310
- After selecting your view/table, we move to selecting your column(s).
::Step 3 (Select Column(s) available from the view/table):
- We’ll utilize the filter functionality to get our column names. For this example, we select wo_no,
wo_descr, wo_comments, asset_id, asset_type, est_total, wg_name and asset_no (asset_no indicates
the placing of asset in a work order, like first asset, second asset, etc.)
- Once you’ve gotten what you want for columns, we can check the condition. If you don’t apply any
condition, you will simply return every single Work Order in the system and probably won’t be able to
filter what you’re looking for.
:

311
:Step 4 (Edit Condition(s) for the columns):
- Normally, in these cases, you can simply select which wg_name you’re in (Workgroup), and the query
will return all of the Work Order from that Workgroup. To give you a broader spec of query’s ability, we’ll
use map to select your assets instead. Remember, you can only see assets and select assets on the
map IF you have asset_id and asset_type columns in your selection.
- For simplicity sake, we’ll be using WATER Workgroup and select wHydrant assets from map.
- We’ll be selecting up to 12 wHydrant from the map, then click the “Paste” Button to paste the assets to
the condition so your query will only limit to the details for the 12 selected assets.
- After pasting, your conditions will look something like this:

312
- This means this query will only returns values regarding these assets.
::Step 5 (Edit Sorting and/or Grouping for the columns):
- We want to group the assets by the Work Order they belong to, so we’ll “Group” by the wo_no column.
You’ll notice the “Sort Order” turns to -1; that just means the column is under Grouping and cannot be
normally sorted.
::

313
Step 6 (View Result(s)):
- Then, we just view the result in the “Result” tab.
- The result will Group all of the assets under Work Order numbers.
- If the asset has a coordinate, the map will show it (as a black dot).
- The title of the result is UNTITLED(32) since you haven’t given this query any name. If you still don’t
want to give the query any name but want the title to be anything other than UNTITLED, we use Header
edit.
- After changing and click “Save”, you’ll see your result changed as well.
- If you want the Footer to be different as well, you also need to change it. For now, we just change
Header.

314
::Step 7 (Download Result(s)):
- You can then click the button and select to download the PDF of this query.

315
::Special Notes:
- If you know what you need to do with the query, you don’t need to follow all of the steps.
- You can select a step by clicking on the tab directly.
- “Conditions” and “Sorting and Grouping” are optional steps. If your query is simple and straightforward
enough, you won’t need to add any conditions.
- If you know what a query’s result will be, you can click the tab “Results” to view the result directly, or
simply download the result.
Developer’s Notes:
For reporting with Jasper Report, MaintStar15 supports several parameters to work with auto-complete or
lookup. These parameters are:
- activity_code_list
- asset_id_list
- asset_type_list
- assign_to_list
- craftsman_list
- craft_trade_list
- fund_source_list
- inventory_list
- inv_no_list
- loc_cd_list
- mgmt_unit_list
- po_blnk_list
- po_no_list
- po_qo_list
- po_req_list
- priority_list
- prog_code_list
- status (single select, applicable only for Work Order)
- warehouse_list
- wg_name_list
- wo_no (single select)
- wo_no_list
- wo_type_list
- it_type_list (this involves the distinct it types from wo_lem, multi-select)
- it_type (single select)
When you create a parameter $P{} in Jasper Report, by using these names as the parameter's names, you
enable the field to utilize look-ups on the front end of desktop application.
If you don't follow these naming conventions, your parameter in the desktop application will just be a free-entry
field, not utilizing look-ups or auto-completes.
Any parameter with ‘_list’ in its name is meant to allow multi-select. When creating this kind of parameter in
Jasper Report, you’d want to set its type to ‘java.util.Collection’. In general, any parameter that’s meant to take
multiple inputs, you’d want to set its type to ‘java.util.Collection’.
For time-related parameters, you’d want to set their type to ‘java.util.Date’. MaintStar15 does not support
Timestamp-type due to some complication with the way they’re displayed from Jasper. All ‘Date’ type
parameters will give you a calendar pop-up when making selection on front end of the desktop application.
MaintStar15 does not limit the amount or different naming of parameters, but some logics and naming
conventions must be followed to correctly utilize the desktop application.
Special note: When selecting it_type with multi-select, you’d need to hold down the ‘ctrl’ key (windows) or ‘cmd’
(on mac) and select multiple.

316
16. ::Logo logics:
There are multiple ways of resetting/setting up your logo with Jasper Report.
Currently, there are 2 main ways:
1. using the LOGO_URL parameter, user can run a report while having a
different logo image other than the default MaintStar logo.
2. Hardcode the logo within the report itself, by manipulating the Image
Object’s Expression to have the logo url OR to insert embedded image as
logo.
How To Embed Logo Image:
- In the Image Object designated to be the logo, insert this logic:
javax.imageio.ImageIO.read(new java.io.ByteArrayInputStream(Base64.getDecoder().decode("<Your Base64 Code>")))
- You’d need to convert an image into Base64 code. You can do this by Google some tools (ex:
https://codebeautify.org/image-to-base64-converter) and convert your selected image into code and copy that code.
- You will replace the logic in <Your Base64 Code> with the code generated.
- This will ensure a permanent embedded logo image. This technique requires some technical knowledge but is
guaranteed to work in case the logo’s url becomes obsolete or inaccessible.

