Enterprise Asset Management (EAMS) v15
CM (Corrective
Maintenance) Work
Order Templates
End User Documentation
Update 1/20/25

EAMS v15 End User Documentation:
CM Templates
Background
Maintstar has a new feature for Work Orders. It is a template which holds a configuration for common
work orders that you perform periodically. It is like the PM template with one big difference. The PM
template holds configuration for Work Orders, but it is tied to frequency and to a schedule. The purpose
of the PM template is to create repeated Work Orders on a cyclical basis.
The new CM Template has no frequency and is not tied to a repeated schedule in any way. The CM
Templates can be created ahead of time and saved. You can have as many CM templates as you like.
These are stored in the CM template section on the Work Order menu. You can apply them for a work
order whenever you want. Think of the CM Templates as a library of common work orders which you
can select and create as needed with much of the work order already filled in. MaintStar still has a Work
Order duplication feature. If you used the duplication feature often, you can now create a template and
build the work order from the template rather than searching for a previous work order to duplicate
from.
Instructions
Page | 2

EAMS v15 End User Documentation:
CM Templates
Creating the CM Template
The templates are created and stored in the Work Order>CM Template section.
Create the CM template with the configuration you want in the resulting Work Oder.
You can set things such as:
• Work Oder type
• Workgroup
• Priority
• Work In Progress code
• Text instructions in either
o The Wo Summary box, or
o The Asset Work Description field, whichever you use.
• You can enter estimated hours and costs
• You can enter LEM or fill the Lem from a Crew.
• You can include attachments, and you include tasks and checklists.
• Whatever you create and save in the CM Template will be added to the work order you create
from the template.
The Asset Type Tab
The asset type tab allows you to list asset types that this template could be used with.
This is optional.
If you do not associate any asset type with the template it will be available for any asset types. If you do
associate the template with one or more asset types, it will be available to use ONLY with those types.
Page | 3

EAMS v15 End User Documentation:
CM Templates
Making a Work Order from a CM Template
There are 2 ways to use the CM Template to make a work Order.
o Start from an asset screen
o Start from the Work Order Screen
Starting from an Asset Screen
You can start the work order from the asset screen.
1. Select the asset for your work order by locating it in the Asset section.
2. Click the Gray ‘Create WO’ on the tool bar of the asset.
3. Select the CM Template from the drop down
4. Click the green New CM Work Order” button, a new work order will be created with all the
elements from the CM Template. (There is also an option to create a new PM work order. Select
the Pm template them click New Pm Work Order)
Page | 4

EAMS v15 End User Documentation:
CM Templates
Starting from a Work Order Screen
From the work order screen,
1. Click the Green ‘New WO button’ will open as usual with nothing from a template prefilled.
2. If you click “more” a second popup window appears.
3. A new work order will be created from the template. This Work Order will be filled with all the
field values you have in the template. If you need to change any values, you can edit the work
order after it has been created.
Page | 5

