Enterprise Asset Management (EAMS) v15
Asset Deficiencies
End User Documentation
Update 3/1/2024

EAMS v15 End User Documentation:
Asset Deficiencies
Asset Deficiencies
MaintStar has an optional (licensed) module called Asset Deficiencies. With this module an organization
can record field deficiencies as Assets with the goal of creating a Work Order against said deficiency. An
example could be a recurring pothole on a road that needs significant resources to resolve. While
submitting a Work Request could suffice, that simply addresses the immediate fix, not resolving the
problem. In addition to recording the deficiency as an asset, it can also be connected to GIS so an
organization can view the records on a map. Often deficiencies are recorded by Code Enforcement or
Inspectors which can then be assigned to work crews or engineers to plan and perform the work.
To utilize the Asset Deficiency module:
• It must be licensed
• Deficiency Asset Type(s) must be created or previously created
• Deficiency Types (Activity Codes) must be created or previously created
• Optionally connected to GIS
Benefits of using Deficiency Module
Tracking deficiencies has proven to be a challenge for many organizations. Often they will rely on third
part tools or applications for tracking. The result is an inefficient method of collecting, analyzing and
responding to the needs of the organization. Below are examples of common “As Is” and MaintStar “To
Be” workflows.
Typical Workflow:
Deficiency Deficiencies GIS Updated
Work Orders Deficiency Deficiency
Deficiency Documented Collected with Deficiency
Created and Updated in Reports
Observed in Third Party and Deficiency Closed
Assigned WO and GIS Generated
App Analyzed Data
MaintStar Workflow:
Deficiency Asset Created
Work Orders Deficiency Updated
Deficiency in MaintStar, GIS Updated
Created and in WO and GIS as it is
Observed Immediately and Reports
Assigned updated and closed
available
Page | 2

EAMS v15 End User Documentation:
Asset Deficiencies
Deficiency Example
The example below shows a recorded
deficiency added by Flood Inspectors
as an Asset. In addition to Asset
Details, pictures are added and it is
plotted on a map and uploaded to GIS.
Preparing the Environment for Deficiencies
Asset Type: Before the module can be used, it must be set up. As described above, once licensed, an
Asset Type must be set up and then GIS (if used).
To set up the Asset Type, navigate to Assets, Asset Type, click New Asset Type. Provide the following
base information:
Page | 3

EAMS v15 End User Documentation:
Asset Deficiencies
• Asset Type Name
• Asset Type Description
• Asset Type Workgroup
• Active Flag
• Auto Key for Asset ID creation
• Set Geometry Type to Point (for a pin) or Linear (for
a line)
Activity Code: In order to classify Deficiencies by type
(potholes, inspections, code issue, etc) Activity Codes must
be added to the Activity Code table. This table is located in
Setup > Tables > Activity Code.
NOTE: Appropriate permissions must be applied to the
logged in user to access setup tables.
GIS Integration: Can be set up to push the recorded deficiencies to an organization’s GIS service. This is
helpful to track the locations of multiple deficiencies which in turn can aid in the planning process.
Before integration can be completed both MaintStar and the organization’s GIS staff should be engaged.
Below is a screenshot of the GIS setup showing the options often selected during the integration.
NOTE: Each environment is different. The below is ONLY an example.
Recording a Deficiency
To record a Deficiency, do the following:
• Open Work Order
• Turn on the Map (double headed chevron)
Page | 4

EAMS v15 End User Documentation:
Asset Deficiencies
• Locate the Deficiency Marker (black pin)
and place on the map
• Once the Marker has been placed a dialog
box will appear
• Set the Deficiency Type (Activity Code
previously created)
• Provide a Description, Notes and
Attachment (if desired)
• Click Create Asset
Creating Work Orders from Deficiencies
The whole point of this effort is to document then assign work from the discovered Deficiencies. Users
have a choice of how to create the Work Order: from the map using a selection tool OR from the
Deficiency Asset itself.
Creating a Work Order from the Deficiency Asset: This can be used to create Work Orders one by one.
• Click Assets > Assets and locate the Deficiency Assets
• Click the “Create WO” button
Page | 5

EAMS v15 End User Documentation:
Asset Deficiencies
• Once the Work Order is created, it will present a confirmation dialog box with the WO Number
Creating a Work Order from the Map Asset: This
can be used to visually locate a particular
Deficiency Asset and create a Work Order from
the map.
NOTE: to use this capability GIS integration must
be set up.
• Click the Map icon to open the map
(double headed chevron)
• Make sure the appropriate map layer is
identified
• Locate the Deficiency Asset and click the Green
“Select Asset” button
• Repeat additional Assets if needed
• All selected Assets will be placed into the selection
‘cart’
• Click the selection ‘cart’ and select all or some of
the Assets for which a Work Order is required
• Click the “Create WO” button
• Once the Work Order is created, it will present a
confirmation dialog box with the WO Number
Creating a Work Order from the Map Filter:
As Asset Deficiencies start to be created, it
can be confusing to find the appropriate
Deficiency Type for which a Work Order
should be created. For instance, the
Deficiency Asset Types might contain
potholes, debris, graffiti, etc. But if only
Page | 6

EAMS v15 End User Documentation:
Asset Deficiencies
“Debris” is to be worked on, then the Map Filter tool
can be used to find all of those Deficiencies by their
Type.
NOTE: to use this capability GIS integration must be
set up.
• Click the Map icon to open the map (double
headed chevron)
• Make sure the appropriate map layer is
identified
• Click the Select Asset icon (three lines)
• Click the Magnifying Glass
• At this point filter clauses can be applied
• Select the appropriate GIS Layer
• Click Add Clause
• Define a Clause, in this case, Deficiency Type
(Activity Code created previously)
• Select “Unique Value” then select the desire
value
• Click Run
• All selected Assets will be placed into the
selection ‘cart’
• Click the selection ‘cart’ and select all or some of
the Assets for which a Work Order is required
• Click the “Create WO” button
• Once the Work Order is created, it will present a
confirmation dialog box with the WO Number
Page | 7

